PAGES: 30

===== PAGE 1 =====
1
FAST-LIVO2: Fast, Direct LiDAR-Inertial-Visual
Odometry
Chunran Zheng1, Wei Xu1, Zuhao Zou1, Tong Hua1, Chongjian Yuan1, Dongjiao He1, Bingyang Zhou1, Zheng
Liu1, Jiarong Lin1, Fangcheng Zhu1, Yunfan Ren1, Rong Wang2, Fanle Meng2, Fu Zhang1†
Fig. 1: FAST-LIVO2 mapping results generated in real time. (a)-(c) showcase airborne mapping, (d) represents a retail street
collected with a handheld device, and (e) demonstrates an experiment where a UAV carrying a LiDAR, camera and inertial
sensor perform real-time state estimation (i.e., FAST-LIVO2), trajectory planning, and tracking control all on its onboard
computer. In (d)-(e), blue lines represent the computed trajectory. In (e1)-(e4), white points indicate the LiDAR scan at that
moment, and colored lines depict the planned trajectory. (e1) and (e4) mark areas of LiDAR degeneration. (e2) and (e3) show
obstacle avoidance. (e5) and (e6) depict the camera first-person view from indoor to outdoor, highlighting large illumination
variation from sudden overexposure to normal (see our accompanying video on YouTube: youtu.be/aSAwVqR22mo).
Abstract—This paper proposes FAST-LIVO2: a fast, direct ments, we use a sequential update strategy in the Kalman filter.
LiDAR-inertial-visual odometry framework to achieve accurate To enhance the efficiency, we use direct methods for both the
and robust state estimation in Simultaneous Localization and visualandLiDARfusion,wheretheLiDARmoduleregistersraw
Mapping (SLAM) tasks and provide great potential in real- points without extracting edge or plane features and the visual
time, onboard robotic applications. FAST-LIVO2 fuses the IMU, module minimizes direct photometric errors without extracting
LiDAR and image measurements, efficiently through an error- ORB or FAST corner features. The fusion of both visual and
state iterated kalman filter (ESIKF). To address the dimension LiDAR measurements is based on a single unified voxel map
mismatchbetweentheheterogeneousLiDARandimagemeasure- where the LiDAR module constructs the geometric structure for
registering new LiDAR scans and the visual module attaches
image patches to the LiDAR points (i.e., visual map points)
†Correspondingauthor(email:fuzhang@hku.hk)
enablingnewimagealignment.Toenhancetheaccuracyofimage
1Mechatronics and Robotic Systems (MaRS) Laboratory, Department of
alignment, we use plane priors from the LiDAR points in the
MechanicalEngineering,UniversityofHongKong,HongKongSAR,China.
2Information Science Academy of China Electronics Technology Group voxel map (and even refine the plane prior in the alignment
Corporation process) and update the reference patch dynamically after new
4202
guA
82
]OR.sc[
2v53041.8042:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
images are aligned. Furthermore, to enhance the robustness visualSLAM.Despitethesestrengths,LiDARSLAMexhibits
of image alignment, FAST-LIVO2 employs an on-demanding severalsignificantshortcomings.Ononehand,thepointcloud
raycast operation and estimates the image exposure time in real
maps it reconstructs, albeit detailed, lack color information,
time. We conduct extensive experiments on both benchmark
thereby reducing their information scale. On the other hand,
and private datasets, demonstrating that our proposed system
significantlyoutperformsotherstate-of-the-artodometrysystems LiDAR SLAM performance tends to deteriorate in environ-
in terms of accuracy, robustness, and computation efficiency. ments presenting insufficient geometric constraints, such as
Moreover, the effectiveness of key modules in the system is also narrow tunnels, a single and extended wall, etc.
validated. Lastly, we detail three applications of FAST-LIVO2:
Asthedemandtooperateintelligentrobotsintherealworld
UAVonboardnavigationdemonstratingthesystem’scomputation
grows, especially in environments that often lack structure or
efficiency for real-time onboard navigation, airborne mapping
showcasing the system’s mapping accuracy, and 3D model ren- texture, it is becoming clear that existing systems relying on
dering(mesh-basedandNeRF-based)underscoringthesuitability a single sensor cannot provide the accurate and robust pose
of our reconstructed dense map for subsequent rendering tasks. estimation as required. To address this issue, the fusion of
We open source our code, dataset and application of this work
commonly-used sensors such as LiDAR, camera, and IMU is
on GitHub1 to benefit the robotics community.
gaining increasing attention. This strategy not only combines
Index Terms—Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
the strengths of these sensors to provide enhanced pose
(SLAM), Sensor Fusion, 3D Reconstruction, Aerial Navigation.
estimation,butalsoaidsintheconstructionofaccurate,dense,
andcoloredpointcloudmaps,eveninenvironmentswherethe
I. INTRODUCTION performance of individual sensors degenerate.
IN recent years, simultaneous localization and mapping Efficient and accurate LiDAR-inertial-visual odometry
(SLAM) technology has seen significant advancements, (LIVO) and mapping are still challenging problems: 1) The
particularly in real-time 3D reconstruction and localization in entire LIVO system is tasked with processing LiDAR mea-
unknown environments. Due to its ability to estimate poses surements, consisting of hundreds to thousands of points per
and reconstruct maps in real time, SLAM has become indis- second, as well as high-rate, high-resolution images. The
pensable for various robot navigation tasks. The localization challenge of fully utilizing such a vast amount of data, partic-
process delivers crucial state feedback for the robot’s onboard ularlywithlimitedonboardresources,necessitatesexceptional
controllers,whilethedense3Dmapprovideskeyenvironmen- computational efficiency; 2) Many existing systems typically
tal information, such as free spaces and obstacles, essential incorporate a LiDAR-Inertial Odometry (LIO) subsystem and
for effective trajectory planning. A colored map also carries a Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO) subsystem, each necessitat-
substantial semantic information, enabling a vivid representa- ing the extraction of features from visual and LiDAR data
tionoftherealworldthatopensupvastpotentialapplications, respectively to reduce computational load. In environments
suchasvirtualandaugmentedreality,3Dmodeling,androbot- that lack structure or texture, this extraction process often
human interactions. results in limited feature points. Furthermore, to optimize
Currently, several SLAM frameworks have been success- feature extraction, extensive engineering adaptations are es-
fully implemented with single-measurement sensors, primar- sential to accommodate the variability in LiDAR scanning
ily cameras [1]–[4] or LiDAR [5]–[7]. Although visual and patterns and point densities; 3) To reduce computational
LiDAR SLAM have shown promise in their own domains, demands and achieve tighter integration between camera and
each has inherent limitations that constrain their performance LiDAR measurements, a unified map is essential to man-
in various scenarios. age sparse points and the observed high-resolution image
Visual SLAM, leveraging cost-effective CMOS sensors and measurements simultaneously. However, designing and main-
lenses, is capable of establishing accurate data associations, taining such maps are particularly challenging considering
thereby achieving a certain level of localization accuracy. The the heterogeneous measurements of LiDAR and cameras; 4)
abundance of color information further enriches the semantic To ensure the accuracy of the reconstructed colored point
perception.Furtherleveragingthisenhancedscenecomprehen- cloud, pose estimation needs to achieve pixel-level accuracy.
sion, deep learning methods are employed for robust feature Meetingthisstandardpresentsconsiderablechallenges:proper
extraction and dynamic object filtering. However, the lack hardwaresynchronization,rigorouspre-calibrationofextrinsic
of direct depth measurement in visual SLAM necessitates parameters between LiDAR and cameras, precise recovery of
concurrent optimization of map points via operations such as exposuretime,andafusionstrategycapableofreachingpixel-
triangulation or depth filtering, which introduces significant level accuracy in real time.
computational overhead that often limits map accuracy and Motivated by these issues, we propose FAST-LIVO2, a
density. Visual SLAM also encounters numerous other lim- high-efficiency LIVO system that tightly integrates LiDAR,
itations, such as varying measurement noise across different imageandIMUmeasurementsthroughasequentiallyupdated
scales, sensitivity to illumination changes, and the impact of error-stateiteratedKalmanfilter(ESIKF).Withthepriorfrom
texture-less environments on data association. IMU propagation, the system state is updated sequentially,
LiDAR SLAM, utilizing LiDAR sensors, obtains precise first by the LiDAR measurements and then by the image
depth measurements directly, offering superior precision and measurements,bothutilizingdirectmethodsbasedonasingle
efficiency in localization and mapping tasks compared with unified voxel map. Specifically, in the LiDAR update, the
systemregistersrawpointstothemaptoconstructandupdate
1https://github.com/hku-mars/FAST-LIVO2 its geometric structure, and in the visual update, the system

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
reuses LiDAR map points as the visual map points directly Taking a step further to underline the real-world applicabil-
without extracting, triangulating, or optimizing any visual ity and versatility of our system, we deploy three distinctive
features from images. The chosen visual map points in the applications. Firstly, fully onboard autonomous UAV naviga-
map are attached with reference image patches previously tion, demonstrating the system’s real-time capabilities, marks
observed and then projected to the current image to align a pioneering instance of employing a LiDAR-inertial-visual
its pose by minimizing the direct photometric errors (i.e., system for real-world autonomous UAV flights. Secondly,
sparseimagealignment).Toimprovetheaccuracyintheimage airbornemappingshowcasesthesystem’spixel-levelprecision
alignment, FAST-LIVO2 dynamically updates the reference under structure-less environments in practical use. Lastly, the
patches and uses the plane priors obtained from LiDAR high-quality generation of mesh, texturing, and NeRF models
points. For improved computation efficiency, FAST-LIVO2 underscores the system’s suitability for rendering tasks. We
uses LiDAR points to identify visual map points visible from make our code and dataset available on GitHub.
thecurrentimageandconductanon-demandingvoxelraycast
II. RELATEDWORKS
in case of no LiDAR points. FAST-LIVO2 also estimates the
exposure time in real time to handle illumination variation. A. Direct Methods
FAST-LIVO2 is developed based on FAST-LIVO first pro- Direct methods stand out as a prominent approach for fast
posed in our previous work [8]. The new contributions com- pose estimation in both visual and LiDAR SLAM. Unlike
pared to FAST-LIVO are listed below: feature-based methods [5, 6, 9, 10] which necessitate the
extraction of salient feature points (e.g., corners and edge
1) We propose an efficient ESIKF framework with sequen-
pixels in images; plane and edge points in LiDAR scans)
tial update to address the dimension mismatch between
and the generation of robust descriptors for matching, direct
LiDAR and visual measurements, improving the robust-
methods directly leverage raw measurements to optimize the
ness of FAST-LIVO that uses asynchronous updates.
sensor pose [11] by minimizing an error function based on
2) We use (and even refine) plane priors from LiDAR
photometric error or point-to-plane residuals, e.g., [3, 12]–
points for improved accuracy. In contrast, FAST-LIVO
[14].Byeliminatingthetime-consumingfeatureextractionand
assumes all pixels in a patch share the same depth, a
matching, direct methods offer fast pose estimation. Nonethe-
wild assumption significantly reducing the accuracy of
less, the absence of feature matching requires fairly accurate
affine warping in image alignment.
state prior estimation to avoid local minima.
3) We propose a reference patch update strategy to improve
DirectmethodsinvisualSLAMcanbebroadlycategorized
the accuracy of image alignment, by selecting high-
intodensedirect,semi-densedirect,andsparsedirectmethods.
quality, inlier reference patches that have large parallax
Dense direct methods, predominantly adopted for RGB-D
and sufficient texture details. FAST-LIVO selects the
cameraswithfulldepthmeasurementsasexemplifiedby[15]–
reference patch based on proximity to the current view,
[17], apply image-to-model alignment for pose estimation. In
oftenresultinginlow-qualityreferencepatchesdegrading
contrast, semi-dense direct methods [3, 18] implement direct
the accuracy.
image alignment by capitalizing on pixels with significant
4) Weconductonlineexposuretimeestimationforhandling
gray-level gradients for estimation. Sparse direct methods
environment illumination variation. FAST-LIVO did not
[2, 12] focus on delivering accurate state estimation through
address this issue, leading to poor convergence in image
onlyafewwell-selectedrawpatches,thusfurtherdiminishing
alignment under significant lighting changes.
the computational burden in comparison to both dense and
5) We propose on-demand voxel raycasting to enhance the
semi-dense direct methods.
system robustness in the absence of LiDAR point mea-
Unlike direct visual SLAM methods, direct LiDAR SLAM
surementscausedbyLiDARcloseproximityblindzones,
systems[13,14,19,20]donotdistinguishbetweendenseand
an issue not considered in FAST-LIVO.
sparse approaches and commonly use spatially-downsampled
Each of the above contributions are evaluated in com- or temporally-downsampled raw points in each scan to con-
prehensive ablation studies to verify their effectiveness. We struct constraints for pose optimization.
implement the proposed system as practical open software, In our work, we harness the principles of the direct method
meticulously optimized for real-time operation on both Intel for both LiDAR and visual modules. The LiDAR module of
and ARM processors. The system is versatile, supporting our system is adapted from VoxelMap [14], and the visual
multi-line spinning LiDARs, emerging solid-state LiDARs model is based on a variant of sparse direct method [12].
withunconventionalscanningpatterns,aswellasbothpinhole Whiledrawinginspirationfromsparsedirectimagealignment
cameras and various fisheye cameras. in [12], our visual module differs by re-utilizing the LiDAR
Besides,weconductextensiveexperimentson25sequences points as visual map points, thus mitigating the intensive
of public datasets (i.e., Hilti and NTU-VIRAL datasets), backendcomputations(i.e.,featurealignment,slidingwindow
alongside various representative private datasets, enabling a optimization and/or depth filtering).
comparison with other state-of-the-art SLAM systems (e.g.,
R3LIVE, LVI-SAM, FAST-LIO2, etc). Both qualitative and B. LiDAR-visual(-inertial) SLAM
quantitative results demonstrate that our proposed system The incorporation of multiple sensors in LiDAR-visual-
significantly outpaces other counterparts in terms of accuracy inertial SLAM equips the system with the capability to han-
and robustness at a reduced computation cost. dle a wide range of challenging environments, particularly

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
when one sensor experiences failure or partial degeneration. time and conducts photometric calibration in advance [38],
Motivated by this, the research community has seen the which enables the system to recover the radiance of map
emergence of various LiDAR-visual-inertial SLAM systems. points. Unlike most previously mentioned LiDAR-inertial-
Existingmethodscangenerallybedividedintotwocategories: visual systems that rely on feature-based methods for both
loosely coupled and tightly coupled. The classification can be LIOandVIOsubsystems,R3LIVEseries[36,37]adoptdirect
determined from two perspectives: the state estimation level methods for both without feature extraction, enabling them to
and the raw measurement level. At the state estimation level, capture subtle environmental features even in texture-less or
the key is whether the estimate from one sensor serves as an structure-less scenarios.
optimization objective in another sensor’s model. At the raw Our system also jointly estimates the state using LiDAR,
measurementlevel,itinvolveswhetherrawdatafromdifferent image and IMU data, and maintains a tightly-coupled voxel
sensors are combined. map at the measurement level. Furtheremore, our system uses
Zhangetal.proposeaLiDAR-Visual-InertialSLAMsystem direct methods, harnessing raw LiDAR points for LiDAR
[21] that is loosely coupled at the state estimation level. In scan registration and employing raw image patches for visual
this system, VIO subsystem only provides the initial pose tracking.ThekeydifferencebetweenoursystemandR3LIVE
for the scan registration in LIO subsystem, instead of being (or R3LIVE++) is that R3LIVE (and R3LIVE++) operate at
optimized jointly with the scan registration. VIL-SLAM [22] anindividualpixellevelintheVIO,whileoursystemoperates
employs a similar loosely-coupled method, not utilizing joint at image patch levels. This difference bestows our system
optimization of LiDAR, camera, and IMU measurements. with marked advantages. Firstly, in terms of robustness, our
Somesystems(e.g.,DEMO[23],LIMO[24],CamVox[25], methodology uses a simplified, one-step frame-to-map sparse
[26]) use 3D LiDAR points to provide depth measurements image alignment for pose estimation, mitigating the heavy
for the visual module [1, 4, 27]. While these systems exhibit reliance on an accurate initial state that is has to be obtained
measurement-leveltightcoupling,theyremainloosely-coupled by a frame-to-frame optical flow in R3LIVEs. Consequently,
instateestimation,primarilyduetotheabsenceofconstraints oursystemsimplifiesandimprovesuponthetwo-stageframe-
directly derived from LiDAR measurements at state estima- to-frame and frame-to-map operations in R3LIVE. Secondly,
tion. Another issue arises as 3D LiDAR points do not have from a computational standpoint, the VIO in R3LIVE pre-
a one-to-one correspondence with 2D image feature points dominantlyemploysadensedirectmethodwhichiscomputa-
and/or lines due to mismatched resolutions. This mismatch tionally expensive, necessitating extensive points for residual
requires interpolation in depth association, introducing po- construction and rendering. In contrast, our sparse direct
tential errors. To address this, DVL-SLAM [28] employs a method provides enhanced computational efficiency. Lastly,
direct method for visual tracking, wherein the LiDAR points oursystemexploitsinformationattheresolutionofrawimage
are directly projected into the image to ascertain the depth of patches, whereas R3LIVE is capped at the resolution of its
corresponding pixel positions. point map.
The works mentioned above have not achieved tight cou- The visual module of our system is most similar to DV-
plingatthestateestimationlevel.Inpursuitofhigheraccuracy LOAM [39], SDV-LOAM [40] and LVIO-Fusion [41], which
and robustness, many recent studies have emerged that jointly projectsLiDARpointsattachedwithpatchesintoanewimage
optimize sensor data in a tightly-coupled manner. To name a and tracks the image by minimizing the direct photometric
few, LIC-Fusion [29] tightly fuses IMU measurements, sparse error. However, they have several key differences, such as the
visual features, and LiDAR plane and edge features based on use of separate maps for vision and LiDAR, reliance on the
the MSCKF [30] framework. The subsequent LIC-Fusion2.0 assumption of constant depth in patch warping in the visual
[31]enhancesLiDARposeestimationbyimplementingplane- module,loosely-couplingatthestateestimationlevel,andtwo
feature tracking within a sliding window. VILENS [32] offers stages of frame-to-frame and frame-to-keyframes for image
ajointoptimizationofvisual,LiDAR,andinertialdatathrough alignment. In contrast, our system tightly integrates frame-
aunifiedfactorgraph,relyingonfixedlagsmoothing.R2LIVE to-map image alignment, LiDAR scan registration, and IMU
[33] tightly fuses the LiDAR, camera and IMU measurements measurements in an iterated Kalman filter. Besides, thanks to
in an on-manifold iterated Kalman filter [34]. For the VIO the single unified map for both LiDAR and visual modules,
subsystem in R2LIVE, a sliding window optimization is used our system can directly employ the plane priors provided by
to triangulate the locations of visual features in the map. the LiDAR points to accelerate the image alignment.
Several systems achieve complete tight coupling at both
the measurement and state estimation levels. LVI-SAM [35]
III. SYSTEMOVERVIEW
fuses the LiDAR, visual and inertial sensors in a tightly-
coupled smoothing and mapping framework, which is built The overview of our system is shown in Fig. 2, which
atop a factor graph. The VIO subsystem performs visual contains four sections: ESIKF (Section IV), Local Mapping
featuretrackingandextractsfeaturedepthusingLiDARscans. (Section V), LiDAR Measurement Model (Section VI), and
R3LIVE [36] constructs the geometric structure of the global Visual Measurement Model (Section VII).
map by LIO and renders map texture by VIO. These two The asynchronously-sampled LiDAR points are first re-
subsystems estimate the system state jointly by fusing their combined into scans at the camera’s sampling time through
respective LiDAR or visual data with IMUs. The advanced scan recombination. Then, we tightly couple the LiDAR,
version, R3LIVE++ [37], estimates exposure time in real imageandinertialmeasurementsviaanESIKFwithsequential

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
Fig. 2: System overview of FAST-LIVO2.
TABLE I: Some Important Notations t t
k-1 k
Time
Notations Explanation
10~50Hz
⊞/⊟ Theencapsulated“boxplus”and Camera
“boxminus”operationsonthestatemanifold Forward propagation
G(·) Avector(·)inglobalworldframe IMU 100~250Hz
C(·) Avector(·)incameraframe
ITL TheextrinsicofLiDARframew.r.t.IMUframe LiDAR 100~500kHz Backward propagation
CTI TheextrinsicofIMUframew.r.t.cameraframe points
GTI TheposeofIMUframeattimek w.r.t.theglobalframe
x,x (cid:98),x¯ Theground-truth,predictedandupdatedestimationofx
x
(cid:98)
κ Theκ-thupdateofx
δx Theerrorstatebetweenground-truthxanditsestimation Fig.3:Illustrationofscanrecombination,forwardpropagation
and backward propagation applied to input data.
state update, where the system state is updated sequentially,
first by the LiDAR measurements and then by the image the global frame (denoted as G). Besides, we assume that the
measurements,bothutilizingdirectmethodsbasedonasingle three sensors are rigidly attached and the extrinsic, defined in
unified voxel map (Section IV). To construct the LiDAR Table I, are pre-calibrated. Then, the discrete state transition
measurement model in the ESIKF update (Section VI), we model at the i-th IMU measurement is:
computetheframe-to-mappoint-to-planeresidual.Toestablish
x =x ⊞(∆tf(x ,u ,w )) (1)
visualmeasurementmodel(SectionVII),weextractthevisual i+1 i i i i
map points within the current FoV from the map, making use where ∆t is the IMU sample period, the state x, input u,
of visible voxel query and on-demand raycasting; after the process noise w, and function f are defined as follows:
extraction, we identify and discard outlier visual map points
M≜SO(3)×R16, dim(M)=19
(e.g., points that are occluded or exhibit depth discontinuity);
we then compute frame-to-map image photometric errors for x≜(cid:2)GRT GpT GvT bT bT GgT τ (cid:3)T ∈M
I I I g a
visual update. u≜(cid:2) ωT aT(cid:3)T , w≜ (cid:104) nT nT nT nT n (cid:105)T
ThelocalmapforbothvisualandLiDARupdatesisavoxel- m m g a bg ba τ
map structure (Section V): the LiDAR points construct and  ω −b −n 
m g g
update the map’s geometric structure, while the visual images 1
Gv + (GR (a −b −n )+Gg)∆t
append image patches to selected map points (i.e., visual map  I 2 I m a a 
 
points)andupdatereferencepatchesdynamically.Theupdated  GR (a −b −n )+Gg 
f(x,u,w)= I m a a 
reference patches have their normal vectors further refined in  n 
 bg 
a separate thread.  n 
 ba 
 0 
3×1
IV. ERROR-STATEITERATEDKALMANFILTERWITH n τ
SEQUENTIALSTATEUPDATE (2)
where GR , Gp , and Gv respectively denote the IMU
This section outlines the system’s architecture, based on I I I
attitude, position, and velocity in the global frame, Gg is the
the sequentially-updated Error-State Iterated Kalman Filter
gravity vector in the global frame, τ is the inverse camera
(ESIKF) framework.
exposure time relative to the first frame, n is the Gaussian
τ
A. Notations and State Transition Model
noise that models τ as a random walk, ω and a are the
m m
In our system, we assume the time offsets among the three raw IMU measurements, n and n are measurement noises
g a
sensors (LiDAR, IMU and camera) are known, which can be in ω and a , b and b are IMU bias, which are modeled
m m a g
calibrated or synchronized in advance. We take IMU frame as random walk driven by Gaussian noise n and n ,
bg ba
(denoted as I) as the body frame and the first body frame as respectively.

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
Algorithm 1: Sequential State Update We denote the above prior distribution as p(x) and the
measurement models for the LiDAR and camera as:
1 Scan recombination to synchronize LiDAR and image
(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21)
data at the camera rate; y l = h l (x,v l ) (4)
2 Forward propagation to obtain state prediction x (cid:98) and y c h c (x,v c )
its covariance P(cid:98); where v ∼ N(0,Σ ) and v ∼ N(0,Σ ) respectively
l vl c vc
3 Backward propagation for LiDAR points motion denote the measurement noises for the LiDAR and camera.
compensation; A standard ESIKF [43] would update the state x using
4 // Point-to-plane LiDAR update all the current measurements, including both LiDAR mea-
5 κ=−1, x (cid:98) κ=0 =x (cid:98) ; surement y l and image measurements y c . However, LiDAR
6 repeat andimagemeasurementsaretwodifferentsensingmodalities,
7 κ=κ+1; whose data dimensions do not match. Furthermore, the fusion
8 Compute residual zκ l and Jacobin Hκ l ; of image measurement may be performed at various levels of
9 Compute the state update x (cid:98) κ+1; the image pyramid. To address the dimension mismatch and
10 until ∥x (cid:98) κ+1⊟x (cid:98) κ∥<ϵ; givemoreflexibilityforeachmodule,weproposeasequential
11 x (cid:98) =x (cid:98) κ+1, P(cid:98) =(I−KH)P(cid:98); update strategy. This strategy is theoretically equivalent to the
12 // Sparse direct visual update standard update using all measurements, assuming statistical
13 level=−1; independenceofLiDARmeasurementsy l andimagemeasure-
14 repeat mentsy c giventhestatevectorx(i.e.,measurementscorrupted
15 κ=−1, x (cid:98) κ=0 =x (cid:98) ; by statistically independent noise).
16 level=level+1; To introduce the sequential update, we rewrite the total
17 repeat conditional distribution for the current state x as:
18 κ=κ+1; p(x|y ,y )∝p(x,y ,y )=p(y |x,y )p(x,y )
19 Compute residual zκ c and Jacobin Hκ c ; l c =p(y |x l )p c (y |x)p( c x) l l (5)
20 Compute the state update x (cid:98) κ+1; c (cid:124) l (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
21 until ∥x (cid:98) κ+1⊟x (cid:98) κ∥<ϵ; ∝p(x|yl)
22 x (cid:98) =x (cid:98) κ+1; Equation (5) implies that the total conditional distribution
23 until level>=2; p(x|y l ,y c ) can be obtained by two sequential Bayesian
24 x¯ =x (cid:98) κ+1; P¯ =(I−KH)P(cid:98). updates. The first step fuses only the LiDAR measurement
y with the IMU-propagated prior distribution p(x) to obtain
l
the distribution p(x|y ):
l
B. Scan Recombination
p(x|y )∝p(y |x)p(x) (6)
l l
We employ the scan recombination to segment the high-
The second step then fuses the camera measurement y with
frequency, sequentially-sampled LiDAR raw points into dis- c
p(x|y ) to obtain the final posterior distribution of x:
tinct LiDAR scans at the camera sampling moments, as l
depicted in Fig. 3. This ensures both camera and LiDAR data p(x|y ,y )∝p(y |x)p(x|y ) (7)
l c c l
aresynchronizedatthesamefrequency(e.g.,10Hz),allowing
Interestingly, the two fusion in (6) and (7) follow the same
for update of state at the same time.
form:
C. Propagation
q(x|y)∝q(y|x)q(x) (8)
In the ESIKF framework, the state and covariance are
propagated from time t , when the last LiDAR scan and To conduct the fusion in (8) for either LiDAR or image
k−1
imageframearereceived,totimet ,whenthecurrentLiDAR measurements, we detail the prior distribution q(x) and mea-
k
scan and image frame are received. This forward propagation surement model q(y|x) as follows. For the prior distribution
predicts the state at each IMU input u
i
during t
k−1
and t
k
, q(x), denote it as x=x
(cid:98)
⊞δx with δx∼N(0,P(cid:98)). In case of
by setting the process noise w
i
in (1) to zero. Denote the the LiDAR update (i.e., the first step), (x
(cid:98)
,P(cid:98)) is the state and
propagatedstateasx
(cid:98)
andcovarianceasP(cid:98),whichwillserveas covariance obtained from the propagation step. In case of the
apriordistributionforthesubsequentupdatein SectionIV-D. visual update (i.e., the second step), (x
(cid:98)
,P(cid:98)) is the converged
Moreover, to compensate for motion distortion, we conduct a state and covariance obtained from the LiDAR update.
backward propagation as in [42], ensuring points in a LiDAR To obtain the measurement model distribution q(y | x),
scan are “measured” at the scan-end time t . Note that for denote state estimated at the κ-th iteration as xκ, where
k (cid:98)
notation simplification, we omit the subscript k in all state x0 =x.Approximatingthemeasurementmodel(4)(eitherthe
(cid:98) (cid:98)
vectors. LiDAR or camera measurement) through its first-order Taylor
expansion made at xκ leads to:
D. Sequential Update (cid:98)
The IMU propagated state x (cid:98) and covariance P(cid:98) impose a y|x≃h(x (cid:98) κ,0)+Hκδxκ+Lκv (9)
priordistributionforx,thesystemstateattimet ,asfollows: (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
k zκ
x⊟x
(cid:98)
∼N(0,P(cid:98)) (3) q(y|x)≃N(h(x (cid:98) κ,0)+Hκδxκ,R) (10)

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
where δxκ =x⊟xκ, zκ is the residual, Lκv ∼N(0,R) is touches the boundaries of the map, we move the map away
(cid:98)
the lumped measurement noise, Hκ and Lκ are the Jacobian from the boundaries by a distance d. As the map moves, the
matrixes of h(xκ ⊞ δxκ,v) with respect to δxκ and v, memory containing the area moved out of the local map will
(cid:98)
evaluated at zero, respectively. be reset to store new areas moved in the local map. This
Then, substituting the prior distribution q(x) and the mea- ring-buffer approach ensures that our local map is maintained
surement distribution q(y|x) in (10) into the posterior dis- withinafixedsizeofmemory.Theimplementationofthering-
tribution (8) and performing maximum likelihood estimation buffer Hash map is detailed in [46]. The map move check is
(MLE), we can obtain the maximum a-posterior estimation performed after each ESIKF update step.
(MAP) of δxκ (and hence xκ) from the standard update step
Local voxel map d C Memory
in the ESIKF framework [43]:
p
B 1
(cid:16) (cid:17)−1 r
K= (Hκ)TR−1Hκ+P(cid:98) −1 (Hκ)TR−1,
x (cid:98) κ+1 =x (cid:98) κ⊞(−Kzκ−(I−KHκ)(x (cid:98) κ⊟x (cid:98) )) (11) L p r 0 p r 0 d B
The converged state and covariance matrix then makes the
mean and covariance of the posterior distribution q(x|y). A A C
(a)Initial map (b)Move the map (c)Reset the memory
Kalman filter with sequential update has been investigated
in the literature, such as in [44, 45]. This paper adopts Fig. 4: 2D demonstration of local map slide. In (a), the grey
this approach for ESIKF for LiDAR and camera systems. rectangleistheinitialmapregionwithlengthL.Theredcircle
The implementation of the ESIKF with sequential update istheinitialdetectionareacenteredatp 0 .In(b),thedetection
is detailed in Algorithm 1. In the first step (Line 6-10), area moves to a new position p 1 where the map boundaries
the error state is updated from the LiDAR measurements aretouched.Themapregionismovedtoanewposition(blue
(Section VI-A) iteratively until convergence. The converged rectangle) by distance d. In (c), the memory space B remains
state and covariance estimates, denoted again as x
(cid:98)
and P(cid:98), are unchanged. The memory space A storing the green area is
used to update the geometry of the map (Section V-B), and reset for the blue area C in (b).
subsequently refined in the second step visual update (Line
13 - 23) on each level of the image pyramid (Section VII-B) B. Geometry Construction and Update
until convergence. The optimal state and covariance, denoted
The geometry of the map is constructed and updated from
as x¯ and P¯, are employed for propagating incoming IMU
LiDAR point measurements. Specifically, after the LiDAR
measurements (Section IV-C) and update the visual structures
update in ESIKF (Section IV), we register all points from the
of the map (Section V-D and V-E).
LiDAR scan to the global frame. For each registered LiDAR
point, we determine its located root voxel in the Hash map. If
V. LOCALMAPPING
the voxel does not exist, we initialize the voxel with the new
A. Map Structure point and index it into the Hash map. If the determined voxel
Our map employs an adaptive voxel structure presented in already exists in the map, we append the point to the existing
[14], which is organized by a Hash table and an octree for voxel. After all points in a scan are distributed, we conduct
eachHashentry(Fig.2).Thehashtablemanagesrootvoxels, geometry construction and update as follows.
each with a fixed dimension of 0.5×0.5×0.5 meters. Each For newly-created voxels, we determine if all the contained
root voxel encapsulates an octree structure to further organize points lie on a plane based on the singular value decomposi-
leaf voxels of varying sizes. A leaf voxel represents a local tion. If so, we calculate the center point q=p¯, plane normal
plane and stores a plane feature (i.e., plane center, normal n, and the covariance matrix of (q,n), denoted as Σ , of
n,q
vector,anduncertainty)alongwithasetofLiDARrawpoints the plane. Σ is used to characterize the plane uncertainty,
n,q
situated on this plane. Some of these points are attached with which arises from both pose estimation uncertainty and the
three-level image patches (8×8 patch size), which we refer point measurement noise. The detailed plane criteria and
toasvisualmappoints.Convergedvisualmappointsareonly calculation of the plane parameters and uncertainties can be
attachedwithreferencepatches,whilenon-convergedonesare referred to our previous work [14]. If the contained points do
attached with reference patches and other visible patches (see not lie on a plane, the voxel is continuously subdivided into
Section V-E). The varying size of the leaf voxel allows it to eight smaller octants until either the points in the sub-voxel
represent local planes of different scales, thus being adaptable are determined to form a plane or the maximum layer (eg., 3)
to environments with different structure [14]. is reached. In the latter case, the points in the leaf voxel will
To prevent the size of the map from going unbound, we bediscarded.Asaresult,themaponlycontainsvoxels(either
keep only a local map within a large local region of length root or sub) identified as planes.
L around the LiDAR’s current position, as illustrated in a 2D For existing voxels that have new points appended, we
example in Fig. 4. Initially, the map is a cube centered at the assess if the new points still form a plane with the existing
LiDAR’s starting position p . The LiDAR’s detection area is points in the root voxel or sub-voxel. If not, we conduct
0
visualized as a sphere centered at its current position, with voxel sub-division as above. If yes, we update the plane’s
its radius defined by the LiDAR’s detection range. When the parameters (q,n) and covariance Σ as above too. Once
n,q
LiDAR moves to a new position p where the detection area the plane parameters converge (see [14]), the plane will be
1

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
considered as mature and new points on this plane will be atthe0-thpyramidlevel(thelevelwiththehighestresolution)
discarded. Moreover, mature planes will have their estimated of both patch, with mean subtraction applied to both patches,
plane parameters (q,n) and covariance Σ fixed. c denotes the cosine similarity between the normal vector
n,q
LiDAR points on planes (either in the root voxel or sub- n and view direction p/∥p∥ of patch f under evaluation.
voxel) will be used for generating visual map points in the When the patch is directly facing the plane where the map
subsequentsection.Formatureplanes,50mostrecentLiDAR point is located, the value of c is 1. The overall score S is
points are candidates for visual map point generation, while calculated by summing the weighted NCC and c, where the
forunmatureplanes,allLiDARpointsarethecandidates.The former represents the average similarity between the patch f
visualmappointgenerationprocesswillidentifysomeofthese underevaluationandallotherpatchesg andtr(Σ )represents
i n
candidate points as visual map points and attach them with the trace of the covariance matrix of the normal vector.
image patches for image alignment. Among all the patches attached to a visual map point,
the one with the highest score is updated as the reference
patch.Theabovescoringmechanismtendstochoosereference
C. Visual Map Point Generation and Update
patches whose (1) appearance is similar (in terms of NCC) to
To generate and update visual map points, we select the most of the rest of the patches, a technique used by MVS
candidate LiDAR points in the map that (1) are visible [47] to avoid patches on dynamic objects; (2) view direction
from the current frame (detailed in Section VII-A), and (2) is orthogonal to the plane, thereby maintaining texture details
exhibit significant gray-level gradients in the current image. at a high resolution. In contrast, the reference patches update
We project these candidate points, after the visual update strategyinourpreviousworkFAST-LIVO[8]andpriorarts[4]
(SectionIV-D),ontothecurrentimageandretainthecandidate directly select the patch with the smallest view direction dif-
pointwiththesmallestdepthforthelocalplaneineachvoxel. ference from the current frame, causing the selected reference
Then,wedividethecurrentimageintouniformgridcellseach patch to be very close to the current frame, hence imposing
with 30×30 pixels. If a grid cell does not contain any visual weak constraints on the current pose update.
mappointprojectedhere,wegenerateanewvisualmappoint
using the candidate point with the highest gray-level gradient
andassociateitwiththecurrentimagepatch,estimatedcurrent
state(i.e.,frameposeandexposuretime),andtheplanenormal
calculated from the LiDAR points as in the previous section.
Thepatchattachedtothevisualmappointshasthreelayersof
thesamesize(e.g.,11×11pixels),eachlayerishalfsampled
from the previous layer, forming a patch pyramid. If a grid
cell contains visual map points projected here, we add new
patch (all three layers of pyramid) to the existing visual map
Fig.5:(a)Affinewarpingbetweenreferencepatchesandtarget
point if (1) more than 20 frames have passed since its last patches. (b) Any normal Irn ∈ S2 lying on the normalized
patch addition, or (2) its pixel position in the current frame sphere is first projected into a point M ∈ R3 on the plane
deviates by more than 40 pixels from its position at the last Irp T M = 1, and then projected to a point m ∈ R2 on the
patch addition. As a result, the map points will likely have
x-y plane. This transformation thereby converts a perturbation
effective patches with uniformly distributed viewing angles.
δn on the sphere into a perturbation δm in x-y plane.
Along with the patch pyramid, we also attach the estimated
current state (i.e.,pose and exposure time to the map point. E. Normal Refine
Each visual map point is assumed to lie on a small local
D. Reference Patch Update plane. Existing works [2, 4, 8] assumed that all pixels in a
patch have the same depth, a wild assumption that does not
A visual map point could have more than one patch due to
hold in general. We use plane parameters computed from the
the addition of new patches. We need to choose one reference
LiDAR points as detailed in Section V-B to achieve greater
patch for image alignment in the visual update. In detail,
accuracy. This plane normal is crucial for performing affine
we score each patch f based on photometric similarity and
warping for image alignment in the visual update process. To
viewing angle as follows:
further enhance the accuracy of the affine warping, the plane
(cid:80) [f(x,y)−¯f][g(x,y)−g¯]
normal could be further refined from the patches attached to
NCC(f,g)= x,y
(cid:113) (cid:80) [f(x,y)−¯f]2(cid:80) [g(x,y)−g¯]2 the visual map point. Specifically, we refine the plane normal
x,y x,y in the reference patch by minimizing the photometric error
n·p 1 with respect to the other patches attached to the visual map
c= , ω = (12)
∥p∥ 1 1+etr(Σn) point.
1 (cid:88) n 1) Affine warping: Affine warping is used to transform
S =(1−ω 1 )· n NCC(f,g i )+ω 1 ·c patch pixels from the reference frame (i.e., the source patch)
i=1 to patch pixels in the rest of the frames (i.e., the target patch),
whereNCC(f,g)representstheNormalizedCross-Correlation illustrated in Fig. 5(a). Let uj be the j-th pixel coordinates
r
(NCC) used to measure the similarity between patch f and g in the source patch and uj be the j-th pixel coordinates in
i

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
the i-th target patch. Assuming all pixels in the patch lie in Once the plane normal converges, the reference patch and
a local plane with normal Irn and visual map point position normal vector for this visual map point are fixed without
Irp(whichcorrespondstothecenterpixelforbothsourceand further refinement, and all other patches are deleted.
targetpatches),bothrepresentedinthesourcepatchframe,we
have:
VI. LIDARMEASUREMENTMODEL
uj =Aiuj
i r r This section details the LiDAR measurement model y l =
Ai =P(IiR +Iit 1 IrnT)P−1 (13) h l (x,v l )usedintheLiDARupdateofESIKFinSectionIV-D.
r Ir IrIrnT ·Irp
whereAi r representstheaffinewarpingmatrixthattransforms A. Point-to-plane LiDAR Measurement Model
the pixel coordinates from the source (or reference) patch
After obtaining the undistorted points {Lp } in a scan, we
to the i-th target patch, IiR and Iit denote the relative j
Ir Ir project them to the global frame using the estimated state xκ
pose of the reference frame I w.r.t. the target frame I . (cid:98)
r i at the κ-th iteration of LiDAR update:
To use fisheye images directly without rectifying them to
pinhole images, we implement projection matrix P and back Gp
(cid:98)
κ
j
=GT(cid:98) κ
I
IT
L
Lp
j
(17)
projectionmatrixP−1 basedondifferentcameramodels(e.g.,
We then identify the root or sub voxel where Gpκ lies in the
Pisthecameraintrinsicmatrixforthepinholecameramodel). (cid:98)j
Hash map. If no voxel is found or the voxel does not contain
2) Normal Optimization: To refine the plane normal Irn,
aplane,thepointisdiscarded.Otherwise,weusetheplanein
we minimize photometric errors between the reference patch
the voxel to establish a measurement equation for the LiDAR
and other image patches at the 0-th pyramid level (i.e., the point. Specifically, we assume the true LiDAR point Lpgt,
highest-resolution level): j
given the accurate LiDAR pose GT , should lie on the plane
I
N2 with normal ngt and center point qgt in the voxel. i.e.,
Irn∗ =arg Ir m n∈ in S2 (cid:88)(cid:88)(cid:13) (cid:13)τ i I i (Ai r uj r )−τ r I r (uj r ) (cid:13) (cid:13) 2 (14) 0 j =(ngt)T(GT IT L j pgt−qgt) (18)
i∈Sj=1 j I L j j
where N is the path size, τ r and τ i are the inverse exposure Since the ground-true point Lpg j t is measured as Lp j with
times of the reference frame and the i-th target frame, respec- ranging and bearing noises δLp , we have Lpgt = Lp −
tively. I r (uj r ) denote j-th patch pixel in the reference frame, δLp .Likewise,theplaneparame j ters(ngt,qgt)a j reestima j ted
I (Aiuj) denotes the j-th path pixel in the i-th target frame, j j j
i r r as (n ,q ) with covariance Σ (Section V-B), so we have:
j j n,q
and S is the set of all target frames. ngt =n ⊟δn , qgt =q −δq . Therefore,
j j j j j j
3) Optimization Variable Transformation: To enhance the
computational efficiency, we reparameterize the least squares 0 =(n j ⊟δn j )T(GT I IT L (Lp j −δLp j )−(q j −δq j ))
problem in (14). Note that th 1 e optimization variable Irn (cid:124)(cid:123) y (cid:122) l (cid:125) (cid:124) hl( (cid:123) x (cid:122) ,vl) (cid:125)
only appeared in M ≜ Irn ∈ R3 in (13), the (19)
IrnT ·Irp
optimization over Irn can be conducted over M. Moreover, where the measurement noise v
l
=(δLp
j
,δn
j
,δq
j
) consist-
the vector M is subject to constraint Irp·M = 1, meaning ing of the noise associated with the LiDAR point, the normal
that M can be parameterized as follows: vector, and the plane center respectively.
 
M
x
M=   M y  =Bm+b B. LiDAR Measurement Noise with Beam Divergence
 Ir 1 p z − I I r r p p x z M x − I I r r p p y z M y  LiD T A he R u f n ra c m er e tai i n s ty dec o o f m a po L se iD d A in R to p t o w in o t c δ om Lp p j one in nts th i e n l [ o 1 c 4 a ] l ,
 1 0   0  the ranging uncertainty δd caused by laser time of flight
(cid:20) (cid:21)
B=    − I 0 rp x − I 1 rp y    ,b=  0 1   ,m= M M x y ∈R2 f ( r T o O m F) e , n a c n o d der th s. e B b e e s a i r d i e n s g th d e ir s e e ct u io n n cer u t n a c in e t r i t e a s in , t w y e δ a ω lso or c i o g n in s a id te e d r
Irp
z
Irp
z
Irp
z
uncertainties caused by the laser beam divergence angle θ,
(15) as illustrated in Fig. 6. As the angle φ between the bearing
whereIrp z ̸=0sincenosuchreferencepatchcouldbechosen direction and normal vector increases, the ranging uncertainty
for the visual map point. The relation among Irn, M, and m of the LiDAR point increases significantly, while the bearing
are shown in Fig. 5 (b). direction uncertainty remains unaffected. The δd due to the
Finally,theoptimizationin(14)isconductedoverthevector laser beam divergence angle can be modeled as:
m ∈ R2 without any constraints. This optimization can be (cid:18) (cid:19)
cosφ cosφ
performed in a separate thread to avoid blocking the main δd=L −L =d − (20)
2 1 cos(θ+φ) cos(θ−φ)
odometry thread. The optimized parameter m∗ can then be
used to recover the optimal normal vector Irn∗: ConsideringδdinfluencedbyTOFandlaserbeamdivergence,
whenoursystemselectsmorepointsfromthegroundorwalls
M∗ (see Fig. 6 (c, d)), it achieves a more precise pose estimation
Irn∗ =
∥M∗∥
,M∗ =Bm∗+b (16)
than that not considering such effect.

===== PAGE 10 =====
10
(a) (b)
Camera
Surface
Visual map points
Current LiDAR scan points
Occluded visual map points
Depth discontinuous visual
map points
Fig. 8: Outlier rejection. (a) shows the diagrammatic drawing
of occluded and depth-discontinuous visual map points. (b)
shows the effect of outlier rejection in real scenes. The red
dots are the rejected visual map points, and the green dots are
the accepted visual map points.
Fig. 6: (a) and (b) respectively illustrate the 3D and side
voxels hit by LiDAR points in the current scan. This can
cross-sectional views of the LiDAR point uncertainty model
be done efficiently by inquiring the voxel Hash table using
consideringthelaserbeamdivergenceangleθ.Theredcontour
the measured point position. If the camera FoV is largely
outlinestheareathatalaserbeamspreads.(c)and(d)colorthe
overlapped with the LiDAR FoV, map points in the camera
points in a scan by the point location uncertainty. Compared
FoV likely lie in these voxels as well. We also poll voxels
to (c), (d) further takes into account the ranging uncertainty
hit by map points identified visible (through the same voxel
δd resulting from the beam divergence angle. This leads to a
query and raycasting) in the previous image frame, assuming
higher uncertainty for ground points due to the large spread
that two consecutive image frames have large FoV overlaps.
area of laser beams.
Finally, the current visual submap can be obtained as map
Sampled points points contained in these two types of voxels followed by a
Sampled pixels FoV check.
Occupied image grids 2) Raycasting on Demand: In most cases, the visual
Voxel with visual map points submap can be obtained through the voxel queries above.
Voxel with LiDARpoints However, a LiDAR sensor could return no points when it is
but without visual points
too close to an object (known as the close proximity blind
Unselected Voxel
zones). Also, the camera FoV may not be completely covered
by the LiDAR FoV. To recall more visual map points in these
cases, we employ a raycasting strategy as illustrated in Fig.
7. We divide the image into uniform grid cells, each with
Z
Y 30 × 30 pixels, and project the visual map points obtained
from the voxel query onto the grid cells. For each image grid
X dmin dmax cell that is not occupied by these visual map points, a ray is
World Frame
cast backward along the central pixel, where sample points
Fig. 7: The illustration of on-demand voxel raycasting.
are uniformly distributed along the ray in the depth direction
from d to d . In order to reduce computation load, the
min max
VII. VISUALMEASUREMENTMODEL positions of sample points on each ray in the camera body
frame are pre-computed. For each sampled point, we evaluate
This section details the visual measurement model y =
c
the corresponding voxel’s status: if the voxel contains map
h (x,v )usedinthevisualupdateofESIKFinSectionIV-D.
c c
points that lie in this grid cell after projection, we incorporate
thesemappointsintothevisualsubmapandceaseforthisray.
A. Visual Map Point Selection Otherwise, we continue to the next sample point on the ray
To perform sparse image alignment in the visual update, until reaching the maximum depth d max . After processing all
we begin by selecting appropriate visual map points. We theunoccupiedimagegridcellsthroughraycasting,weobtain
first extract the set of map points (termed as visual submap) a set of visual map points that distribute among the whole
that is visible in the current camera FoV, using voxel and image.
raycasting queries. Then, the visual map points from this 3) Outlier Rejection: After voxel query and raycasting,
submap are selected and outliers are rejected. This process we obtain all visual map points in the current frame FoV.
yieldsarefinedsetofvisualmappointsreadyforconstructing However, these visual map points could be occluded in the
visual photometric errors in the visual measurement model. current frame, have discontinuous depth, have their reference
1) Visible Voxel Query: Identifying map voxels within the patch taken at large view angles, or have large view angles
current frame FoV is challenging due to the large number in the current frame, all of which can severely degrade image
of voxels in the map. To address this issue, we poll the alignment accuracy. To address the first issue, we project all

===== PAGE 11 =====
11
the visual map points in the submap into the current frame time τ = 1 to eliminate the degeneration of equation (22)
0
using the pose after the LiDAR update and keep the lowest- when all inverse exposure time are zeros. The estimated
depth points in each grid cell of 30×30 pixels. To address inverse exposure times of subsequent frames are therefore the
the second issue, we project the LiDAR points in the current exposure time relative to the first frame.
LiDAR scan to the current frame producing a depth map. By The equation (22) is used in the visual update step across
comparing the depth of visual map points with their 9×9 three levels (see Algorithm 1); the visual update starts from
neighbor in the depth map, we determine their occlusion and the coarsest level, after the convergence of a level, it proceeds
depthvariation.Occludedanddepth-discontinuousmappoints to the next finer level. The estimated state is then used to
arerejected(seeFig.8).Toaddressthethirdandfourthissue, generatevisualmappoints(SectionV-C)andupdatereference
weremovepointswheretheviewangle(i.e.,theanglebetween patch (Section V-D).
normal vector and direction from the visual map point to the
patch optical center) of the reference patch or current patch
VIII. DATASETSFOREVALUATION
is too large (e.g. over 80°). The remaining visual map points
In this section, we introduce datasets for performance eval-
will be used to align the current image.
uation, including public datasets NTU-VIRAL [49], Hilti’22
B. Sparse-Direct Visual Measurement Model [50],Hilti’23[51],andMARS-LVIG[52],aswellasourself-
The visual map points {Gp } extracted above are used collected FAST-LIVO2 private dataset. Specifically, the NTU-
i
VIRAL and Hilti datasets are used to conduct a quantitative
to construct the visual measurement model. The underlying
principle is that, when transforming the map point Gp to benchmark comparison of our system against other state-of-
i the-art (SOTA) SLAM systems (Section IX-B). The FAST-
the current image I (·) with the ground-truth state (i.e., pose)
k
LIVO2privatedatasetisprimarilyusedtoevaluateoursystem
x , the photometric error between the reference patch and the
k
acrossvariousextremelychallengingscenarios(SectionIX-C),
current patch should be zero:
todemonstrateitscapabilityforhigh-precisionmapping(Sec-
0=τ k Ig k t(π(CT I (GT I )−1Gp i )+∆u) tion IX-D), and to validate the functionality of the individual
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
modules within our system (Sections I-A through I-D in the
ui
(21)
−τ Igt(π(CrT Gp )+Ar∆u) Supplementary Material [53]). MARS-LVIG dataset is em-
r r G i i
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) ployedforapplicationdemonstrations(SectionX)andablation
u′
i study (Section I-E in the Supplementary Material [53]).
where π(·) is the common camera projection model (i.e.,
Pinhole, MEI, ATAN, Scaramuzza, Equidistant), CrT is the
G A. NTU-VIRAL, Hilti and MARS-LVIG Dataset
pose of the global frame G w.r.t. reference frame C , which
r
has been estimated when receiving and fusing the reference TheNTU-VIRALdataset,collectedattheNanyangTechno-
frame, Ar is the affine warping matrix that transforms pixels logical University campus using an aerial platform, presents
i
from the i-th current patch to the reference patch, ∆u is diverse scenarios embodying unique aerial operational chal-
the relative pixel position to the center u within the current lenges. Specifically, the “sbs” sequences can only provide
i
patch, Igt,Igt denote the ground-true pixel values of the noisyvisualfeaturesfromdistantobjects.The“nya”sequences
k r
reference and current frames, respectively. They are measured present challenges to LiDAR SLAM due to semi-transparent
astheactualimagepixelvaluesI ,I withmeasurementnoise surfacesandtovisualSLAMowingtointricateflightdynamics
k r
v =(δI ,δI ), which originate from various sources (e.g., and low lighting conditions. The dataset is equipped with a
c k r
shot noise and the Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC) noise 16-channel OS1 gen13 LiDAR sampled at 10 Hz and with a
of the camera CMOS). Hence, built-inIMUat100Hz,andtwosynchronizedpinholecameras
triggered at 10 Hz. The left camera is used for evaluation.
0 =τ (I (u +∆u)−δI )−τ (I (u′+Ar∆u)−δI )
k k i k r r i i r The Hilti’22 and Hilti’23 datasets, collected by handheld
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
yc hc(x,vc) and robot devices, encompass indoor and outdoor sequences
(22) from environments like construction sites, offices, labs and
To enhance computational efficiency, we employ an inverse parkingareas.Thesesequencesintroducenumerouschallenges
compositionalformulation[4,48],wheretheposeincremental from long corridors, basements, and stairs, with textureless
δT ∈ R6 parameterizing GT
I
=GT(cid:98) κ
I
Exp(δT) in u
i
(see features, varying illumination conditions, and insufficient Li-
(21)), is moved from u to u′ as follows: DAR plane constraints. Handheld sequences use a Hesai
i i PandarXT-324 LiDARat10Hz,fivewide-anglecamerasat40
u
i
=π(CT
I
(GT(cid:98) κ
I
)−1Gp
i
)
(23) Hz, which is downsampled into 10 Hz, and an external Bosch
u′ =π(CrT Exp(δT)Gp ) BMI085 IMU at 400 Hz. Meanwhile, the robot-mounted
i G i
sequencesfeatureaRobosenseBPearl5 LiDARat10Hz,eight
Giventhatu′ inthereferenceframeremainsunchangedduring
i omnidirectional cameras at 10 Hz, and an Xsens MTi-670
each iteration, we only require a one-time computation of the
IMUat200Hz.Inbothcases,thefront-facingcameraisused
Jacobian matrices w.r.t. δT, rather than re-calculating them
for every iteration.
3https://ouster.com/products/os1-lidar-sensor
To estimate the inverse exposure time τ k from the mea- 4https://www.hesaitech.com/product/xt32/
surement equation (22), we fix the initial inverse exposure 5https://www.robosense.ai/en/rslidar/RS-Bpearl

===== PAGE 12 =====
12
for all systems under evaluation. Millimeter-accurate ground buildings, corridors, basements, mining tunnel, etc.) charac-
truth,obtainedthroughamotioncapturesystem(MoCap)ora terized by structure-less, cluttered, dim, variable-lighting, and
TotalStation[54],isprovidedforeachsequence.Notethatthe weakly textured environments, with a total duration of 66.9
groundtruthoftheHiltidatasetsisnotopen-source;therefore, min. Most sequences exhibit visual and/or LiDAR degenera-
algorithmicresultsonthesedatasetsareevaluatedviatheHilti tion, such as facing a single and/or texture-less plane, travers-
official website. Since “Site 3” in Hilti’23 does not provide ing an extremely narrow and/or dark tunnel, and experiencing
in-depth analysis plots (e.g., RMSE), we exclude these four varying light conditions from indoor to outdoor (see Fig. S7
sequences,butourscoringresultsforthesesequencescanstill in the Supplementary Material [53]). To guarantee enhanced
be found on their official website6. NTU-VIRAL and Hilti synchronous data collection between the camera and LiDAR,
contribute a total of 25 sequences. we configure the camera with fixed exposure time but auto-
The MARS-LVIG dataset provides high-altitude, ground- gainmodeinmostscenarios.Fortheremainingsequenceswith
facing mapping data that encompasses diverse unstructured auto-exposure,werecordtheirgroundtruthexposuretimes.In
terrains such as jungles, mountains, and islands. The dataset allsequences,theplatformreturnstothestartingpoint,which
was collected via a DJI M300 RTK quadrotor, which is enables the drift evaluation.
equipped with a Livox Avia7 LiDAR (with built-in BMI088
IMU) and a high-resolution global-shutter camera, both trig-
IX. EXPERIMENTRESULTS
gered at 10 Hz. This is notably distinct from the aforemen-
Inthissection,weconductextensiveexperimentstoevaluate
tioned NTU-VIRAL and Hilti datasets, which use 752×480
our proposed system.
grayscale images, while the MARS dataset employs 2448×
2048 RGB images, thereby facilitating the generation of
clear, dense colored point clouds. Therefore, we leverage this A. Implementation and System Configurations
publicdatasettovalidateourcapabilitiesinhigh-altitudeaerial
We implemented the proposed FAST-LIVO2 system in
mapping applications.
C++ and Robots Operating System (ROS). In the default
(a) Camera (b) Livox Avia configuration, the exposure time estimation is enabled, while
STM32 1 Hz
LiDAR normalvectorrefinementisturnedoff.LiDARpointsinascan
Sychn Pulse signal 1
aredownsampledtemporallyata1:3ratio.Therootvoxelsize
Timers 10 Hz Camera for the voxel map is set at 0.5 m, and the maximum layer of
Pulse signal 2
Synthetic USB the internal octree is 3. The image patch size is 8 × 8 for
On-board GPRMC Serial
image alignment and 11×11 for normal refinement. Within
PC
Build-in IMU the sequential ESIKF settings, for all the experiments, the
10 Hz Point Cloud
Battery STM32 camera photometric noise is set to a constant value of 100.
On-board PC and RGB image
The LiDAR depth error and bearing angle error are adjusted
Fig. 9: Our platform with hardware synchronization for data to 0.02 m and 0.05° for Livox Avia LiDAR and OS1-16,
acquisition. (a) our handheld platform, (b) the hardware syn- 0.001 m and 0.001° for PandarXT-32, 0.008 m and 0.01° for
chronization scheme. Robosense BPearl LiDAR. The laser beam divergence angle
is set at 0.15° for Livox Avia LiDAR and OS1-16, and at
B. FAST-LIVO2 Private Dataset 0.001° for the PandarXT-32 and Robosense BPearl LiDAR.
To validate the system’s performance under more extreme Our system uses the same parameters in all sequences of all
conditions (e.g., LiDAR degeneration, low illumination, dras- datasetswiththesamesensorsetup.Thecomputationplatform
tic exposure changes, and cases of no LiDAR measurements), for all experiments is a desktop PC equipped with an Intel i7-
we make a new dataset named FAST-LIVO2 private dataset. 10700KCPUand32GBRAM.ForFAST-LIVO2,wealsotest
The dataset, hardware device, and hardware synchronization it on an ARM processor that is commonly used in embedded
scheme are released with the codes of this work to facilitate systems with reduced power and cost. The ARM platform is
the reproduction of our work. RB58. with a Qualcomm Kryo585 CPU and 8 GB RAM. We
1) Platform: Our data collection platform, illustrated in refer to the implementation of FAST-LIVO2 on the ARM-
Fig. 9, is equipped with an industrial camera (MV-CA013- based platform as “FAST-LIVO2 (ARM)”.
21UC),aLivoxAviaLiDAR,andaDJImanifold-2c(Inteli7-
8550uCPUand8GBRAM)asonboardcomputers.Thecam-
B. Benchmark Experiments
eraFoVis70.6◦×68.5◦ andtheLiDARFoVis70.4◦×77.2◦.
In this experiment, we conduct quantitative evaluations on
Allsensorsarehardsynchronizedwitha10Hztriggersignal,
25 sequences from the NTU-VIRAL, Hilti’22, and 23 open
generated by STM32 synchronized timers.
datasets. Our approach is benchmarked against several state-
2) Sequence Description: As summarized in Table S1 in
of-the-art open-source odometry systems, including R3LIVE
theSupplementaryMaterial[53],FAST-LIVO2privatedataset
[36], a dense direct LiDAR-inertial-visual odometry system;
comprises 20 sequences across various scenes (e.g., campus
FAST-LIO2 [13], a direct LiDAR-inertial odometry system;
6https://hilti-challenge.com/leader-board-2022.html, https://hilti-challenge.
com/leader-board-2023.html 8https://www.adlinktech.com/Products/Computer on Modules/SMARC/
7https://www.livoxtech.com/avia LEC-RB5?lang=en

===== PAGE 13 =====
13
TABLE II: Absolute translational errors (RMSE, meters) in sequences
SDV- Our FAST- LVI- FAST- Ours Ours Ours
Dataset Sequence R3LIVE Ours
LOAM LIO LIO2 SAM LIVO (w/oexpo) (wnormal) (w/oupdate)
ConstructionGround 25.121 0.011 0.013 0.021 × 0.022 0.011 0.008 0.015 0.010
ConstructionMultilevel 12.561 0.031 0.044 0.024 × 0.052 0.021 0.018 0.025 0.020
ConstructionStairs 9.212 0.221 0.320 0.784 9.142 0.241 0.049 0.027 0.151 0.016
LongCorridor 19.531 0.061 0.064 0.061 6.312 0.065 0.069 0.059 0.071 0.067
Hilti’22
Cupola 9.321 0.221 0.250 2.142 × 0.182 0.161 0.122 0.179 0.121
LowerGallery 11.232 0.014 0.024 0.008 2.281 0.022 0.010 0.008 0.010 0.007
AttictoUpperGallery 4.551 0.223 0.720 2.412 × 0.621 0.101 0.077 0.221 0.069
OutsideBuilding 2.622 0.030 0.028 0.029 0.952 0.052 0.042 0.033 0.050 0.035
Floor0 4.621 0.028 0.031 0.018 × 0.021 0.025 0.023 0.023 0.022
Floor1 7.951 0.025 0.031 0.024 8.682 0.022 0.024 0.022 0.031 0.023
Floor2 7.912 0.041 0.083 0.046 × 0.048 0.023 0.021 0.051 0.022
Basement 6.151 0.021 0.038 0.024 × 0.035 0.020 0.018 0.018 0.016
Hilti’23
Stairs 9.032 0.110 0.170 0.110 3.584 0.152 0.025 0.020 0.132 0.018
Parking3xfloorsdown 19.952 0.162 0.320 0.462 × 0.356 0.035 0.022 0.112 0.032
Largeroom 16.781 0.121 0.028 0.035 0.563 0.031 0.033 0.027 0.118 0.026
Largeroom(dark) 15.012 0.051 0.040 0.059 × 0.053 0.049 0.051 0.058 0.046
eee 01 0.301 0.122 0.212 0.072 3.901 0.191 0.069 0.066 0.109 0.068
eee 02 1.842 0.131 0.172 0.059 0.182 0.132 0.051 0.055 0.112 0.051
eee 03 0.301 0.124 0.213 0.078 0.287 0.192 0.068 0.070 0.099 0.068
nya 01 0.202 0.084 0.141 0.080 0.205 0.121 0.075 0.078 0.106 0.073
NTUVIRAL
nya 02 0.214 0.153 0.212 0.084 1.296 0.182 0.076 0.081 0.118 0.075
nya 03 0.251 0.082 0.133 0.079 0.176 0.112 0.060 0.060 0.092 0.059
sbs 01 0.212 0.112 0.184 0.075 0.254 0.253 0.064 0.063 0.098 0.062
sbs 02 0.233 0.123 0.161 0.076 0.221 0.134 0.062 0.048 0.116 0.061
sbs 03 0.281 0.122 0.142 0.070 0.309 0.132 0.061 0.047 0.119 0.060
Average 7.416 0.097 0.151 0.278 1.928 0.137 0.051 0.044 0.089 0.045
×denotesthesystemtotallyfailed.
SDV-LOAM [40], a semi-direct LiDAR-visual odometry sys- The results of all methods are shown in Table II. It is seen
tem; LVI-SAM [35], a feature-based LiDAR-inertial-visual that our method achieves the highest overall accuracy across
SLAM system; and our previous work FAST-LIVO [8]. all sequences with an average RMSE of 0.044 m, which is
ThesesystemsaredownloadedfromtheirrespectiveGitHub three times more accurate than the second-place FAST-LIVO
repositories.ForFAST-LIO2,FAST-LIVO,andLVI-SAM,we at 0.137 m. Our system delivers the best results in most
use the recommended settings for indoor and outdoor scenes sequences, except for ”Outside Building” and ”Large Room
equipped with multi-line LiDAR sensors. For R3LIVE, we (dark)”,whereoursystemexhibitsaslightly(millimeter-level)
adapt the system to work with fisheye camera models and higher error compared to the LiDAR-inertial only odometry
multi-line LiDARs equipped with external IMUs (the default FAST-LIO2. This discrepancy can be attributed to the rich
configuration only supports internal IMUs). We disable the structural features but poor lighting conditions of these se-
real-timeoptimizationofthecameraintrinsicandtheextrinsic quences, resulting in dim and blurred images. Consequently,
CT due to adverse optimization caused by insufficient IMU fusing these low-quality images does not enhance odome-
I
excitation in the datasets. Other parameters, including the try accuracy. Excluding these two sequences, our method,
window size and pyramid level for optical flow tracking, the which leverages tightly-coupled LiDAR, inertial, and visual
resolution for downsampling the point cloud of the current information, outperforms FAST-LIO2, our LIO subsystem,
scan and the global map, are fine-tuned to achieve optimal and the LiDAR-visual only odometry, SDV-LOAM, signifi-
performance. Since only the vision module of SDV-LOAM cantly. Notably, SDV-LOAM performs particularly poorly on
is open-sourced, we integrate it with LeGO-LOAM [7] in a the Hilti datasets due to its lack of tight integration with
looselycoupledmanner,followingthemethodologydescribed IMU measurements, leading to drift in the LO subsystem.
in the original paper [40]. This enhanced system continues Additionally, the loose coupling between LiDAR and visual
to refine poses obtained from the vision module and we also observations, along with poor initial values for VO, often
openthisimplementationonGitHub9.Giventhatallcompared results in local optima or even negative optimization. Our
systems are odometry without loop closure, except for LVI- LIO subsystem generally surpasses FAST-LIO2 due to our
SAM, we remove the loop-closure module of LVI-SAM to more accurate noise modeling for each LiDAR point. In a
ensureafaircomparison.Additionally,weconductanablation few sequences where FAST-LIO2 outperforms slightly, the
study on the exposure time estimation module, the normal differencesareminimal,atthemillimeterlevel,andnegligible.
refine module, and the reference patch update strategy. The Moreover, our system’s accuracy significantly exceeds that of
default FAST-LIVO2 has real-time exposure estimation and other tightly coupled LiDAR-inertial-visual systems across all
reference patch update, but no normal refinement. sequences. Among them, LVI-SAM fails in nine sequences
primarily due to its feature-based LIO and VIO subsystems
9https://github.com/xuankuzcr/SDV-LOAM reimplementation

===== PAGE 14 =====
14
not fully utilizing raw measurements, which degrades its in Fig. 10 and 11. Fig. 10 showcases LiDAR degeneration
robustness in environments with subtle geometric or texture sequenceswheretheLiDARisfacingabigwallwhilemoving
features. R3LIVE generally performs well, but struggles in along the wall from one side to the other. Due to the absence
“ConstructionStairs”,“Cupola”,and“AttictoUpperGallery” of geometrical constraints since only one wall plane is being
sequences, where its performance is even worse than FAST- observed by the LiDAR, LIO methods would fail. It’s worth
LIO2. This is because intense rotations at structure-less stair- mentioningthatthe“HITGraffitiWall”sequencespansnearly
cases result in inadequate pose priors, causing local optima 800 meters with LiDAR continuously facing the wall, leading
when aligning colored map points with the current frame, and to considerable degeneration. In all sequences, FAST-LIVO2
ultimately leading to negative optimization. FAST-LIVO and distinctly showcases its robustness against even long-term
FAST-LIVO2 overcome such challenges in these sequences degeneration and its capability to deliver high-precision col-
by the patch-based image alignments. Additionally, situations ored point maps. In contrast, FAST-LIVO managed to obtain
where the sensors are close to walls in these sequences high- the geometric structure but with completely blurred texture.
light the effectiveness of raycasting in FAST-LIVO2, with the R3LIVE struggles with both geometric structure and texture
mapping results in these large-scale scenes shown in Fig. S8 clarity. Fig.11showcasestestsinmorecomplicatedscenarios
intheSupplementaryMaterial[53].Ontheotherhand,FAST- where LiDAR and/or camera both degenerate occasionally.
LIVO is outperformed by R3LIVE and FAST-LIVO2 on the Thedegenerationdirectionsareindicatedbyrespectivearrows.
NTU-VIRAL dataset, especially in unstructured scenes like “HKU Cultural Center” (Fig. 11 (a)) showcases the mapping
“nya” sequences, where the effects of affine warping based results of FAST-LIVO2, R3LIVE, and FAST-LIVO. As can
on constant depth assumptions are inaccurate. In contrast, be seen, R3LIVE and FAST-LIVO have distorted point maps,
the pixel-level alignment of R3LIVE and the plane prior (or blurred textures, and drifts exceeding 1 m. In contrast, FAST-
refinement) of FAST-LIVO2 do not encounter such issues. LIVO2 successfully returns to the starting point, achieving an
Comparing the different variants of FAST-LIVO2, we ob- impressiveend-to-enderroroflessthan0.01m,whileachiev-
serve that the average accuracy without real-time exposure ingaconsistentpointmapwithcleartextures.“CBDBuilding
time estimation decreases by 6 mm compared to the default, 03” (Fig. 11 (b)) and “Mining Tunnel” (Fig. 11 (c)) display
as the exposure time estimation can actively compensate onlyFAST-LIVO2results,asR3LIVEandFAST-LIVOfailed.
illumination changes in the environment. On the other hand, In Fig. 11 (b), the blue arrow represents movement towards a
the average accuracy without the reference patch update de- pure black screen, indicating concurrent LiDAR and camera
creases by 44 mm compared to the default, as the reference degeneration.InFig.11(c1)and(c2),theredpointsrepresent
patch update strategy effectively selects patches with higher the LiDAR scan at that location, illustrating the areas of
resolution and avoids selecting outlier patches. Finally, the LiDAR degeneration due to the single plane being observed.
normal refinement increases the average accuracy by 1 mm, Furthermore, the “Mining Tunnel” exhibits very dim lighting
and the accuracy improvement is not consistent in all se- throughout the whole sequence, coupled with frequent visual
quences. The limited improvement is mainly because normal and LiDAR degeneration. Despite of these challenges, FAST-
vector refinement yields positive optimization only in simple LIVO2 still returns to the starting point with an end-to-end
structured scenes with nice image observations. In the NTU- error of less than 0.01 m in both sequences.
VIRAL dataset, images from the “eee” and “nya” sequences
are extremely dim and blurry, where negative optimization
D. High-precision Mapping
is particularly severe. To further study the effectiveness of
the different modules, including exposure time estimation, In this experiment, we validate the high-precision map-
affine warping, reference patch update, normal convergence, ping capabilities of our system. To explore the mapping
on-demand raycasting, and ESIKF sequential update, we con- accuracy across different algorithms and ensure fairness, we
ducted a thorough study on our private dataset and MARS- compare our system with FAST-LIO2, R3LIVE, and FAST-
LVIG dataset. The results are presented in Section I (System LIVO in scenes characterized by rich texture and structured
ModuleValidation)intheSupplementaryMaterial[53]dueto environments. We take the sequences “SYSU 01”, “HKU
the space limit. As confirmed in the results, our system can Landmark” and “CBD Building 01” as examples. Fig. S9 in
achieverobustandaccurateposeestimationinbothstructured theSupplementaryMaterial[53]showsthecoloredpointmaps
and unstructured environments, under severe light variations, of these sequences reconstructed in real time. We can clearly
inremarkablylarge-scalescenarioswithlong-term,high-speed observe that the point maps generated by FAST-LIVO2 retain
datacollection,andeveninextremelynarrowspaceswithfew the finest details among all the systems, the enlarged views of
LiDAR measurements. the colored point maps are akin to those in the actual RGB
image. In the “SYSU 01” sequence, our algorithm produces
fewerwhitenoisedotsonthesignboardbecausewenormalize
C. LiDAR Degenerated and Visually Challenging Environ-
the image colors to a reasonable exposure time using the
ments
recovered exposure time before coloring, resulting in rarely
Inthisexperiment,weevaluatetherobustnessofoursystem overexposed colored point maps. The reconstruction of the
under environments experiencing LiDAR degeneration and/or humanandmotorcyclein“CBDBuilding01”alsoexemplifies
visual challenges, comparing it with the qualitative mapping our ability to rebuild the details of unstructured objects. In all
results of FAST-LIVO and R3LIVE in 8 sequences as shown sequences, the estimated final position returns to the starting

===== PAGE 15 =====
15
Fig. 10: The mapping results generated in real time in LiDAR degenerated scenes. The point clouds from top to bottom
correspond to “Bright Screen Wall”, “Black Screen Wall”, “HIT Graffiti Wall” (the third and fourth rows), “Banner Wall”,
“HKU Lecture Center”, respectively, showing the comparison of colored point cloud constructed FAST-LIVO2, FAST-LIVO
or R3LIVE (see more details on YouTube: youtu.be/aSAwVqR22mo).
point with an end-to-end error of less than 0.01 m. We also processing time. For R3LIVE, although also employing a
tested FAST-LIVO2 in the remaining sequences of the prviate direct method, its pixel-wise image alignment necessitates the
dataset, with mapping results shown in Fig. S10-S13 in the use of a large number of visual map points. In contrast, our
Supplementary Material [53]. approach uses sparse points with reference patches, enabling
efficientalignment.Additionally,R3LIVEmaintainsacolored
E. Run Time Analysis mapthatundergoesBayesianupdating,significantlyincreasing
In this section, we evaluate the average computational time the computational load as the map resolution increases. For
per LiDAR scan and image frame of our proposed system, FAST-LIO2, the average processing time per frame (Table S3
tested on a desktop PC equipped with an Intel i7-10700K in the Supplementary Material [53] due to space constraints)
CPU and 32 GB RAM. Our evaluations span public datasets is approximately 10.35 ms less than FAST-LIVO2 due to not
includingHilti’22,Hilti’23,andNTU-VIRAL,andourprivate processing additional image measurements.
dataset. As shown in Table III, our system exhibits the lowest FAST-LIVO2 also shows noticeable improvements over the
processingtimeacrossallsequences.Theaveragecomputation predecessor FAST-LIVO. The primary enhancement stems
time consumption on an Intel i7 processor is only 30.03 ms from our application of inverse compositional formulation in
(17.13 ms per LiDAR scan and 12.90 ms per image frame), the sparse image alignment. Employing affine warping based
fulfillingreal-timeoperationat10Hz.Besides,oursystemcan on the plane prior from LiDAR points further enhances the
even operate in real time on ARM processors with an average convergence efficiency of our method. Consequently, FAST-
processing time per frame of just 78.44 ms. LVI-SAM’s LIVO2 reduces the number of iterations per pyramid level
LiDAR and visual feature extraction modules in LIO and from 10 to 3, while still achieving superior accuracy.
VIO are time-consuming. In addition to the time consumed
by LIO and VIO, LVI-SAM integrates IMU pre-integration
X. APPLICATIONS
constraints,visualodometryconstraints,andLiDARodometry To showcase the superior performance and versatility of
constraintswithinafactorgraph,furtherincreasingtheoverall FAST-LIVO2 in real-world applications, we develop multiple

===== PAGE 16 =====
16
Fig. 11: The mapping results generated in real time in complex LiDAR degenerated and visually challenging scenes. (a), (b),
and(c)correspondto“HKUCulturalCenter”,“CBDBuilding03”,and“MiningTunnel”,respectively.Differentcoloredarrows
indicatethedirectionsofdegenerationcausedbydifferentsensors(seemoredetailsonYouTube:youtu.be/aSAwVqR22mo).

===== PAGE 17 =====
17
TABLEIII:Processingtime(ms)perLiDARandimageframe
Onboard computer Flight controller
Desired angular
Trajectory MPC velocity Angular Velocity
Dataset R3LIVE LVI- FAST- FAST-LIVO2 FAST-LIVO2 commands Controller Desired thrust Controller
SAM LIVO (LiDAR/Image) (ARM)
Position, velocity,
Hilti’22 attitude feedback Desired
ConstructionGround 105.03 × 52.33 36.52(20.44/15.05) 96.12 (200 Hz) moments
ConstructionMultilevel 112.13 × 56.12 38.77(21.38/17.39) 95.38 Trajectory Extended Angular
ConstructionStairs 125.41 138.47 51.34 39.33(24.32/15.01) 98.43 Planner Kalman filter f v e e e l d o b c a it c y k Mixer
LongCorridor 120.42 109.97 48.68 41.42(26.21/15.21) 94.33
Cupola 151.52 × 59.42 43.54(26.53/17.01) 98.12 Motor
Position feedback IMU (200 Hz, PWM
LowerGallery 119.74 131.37 51.15 41.11(25.69/15.42) 92.13 (10 Hz) filght control)
AttictoUpperGallery 144.39 × 58.61 44.21(27.12/17.09) 91.15 LiDAR Camera
OutsideBuilding 105.17 107.92 44.25 33.82(18.91/14.91) 85.43 D P e o n si s t e i o p n o i e n s t t i c m lo a u te d FAST-LIVO2 Image (10 Hz) STM32 Bu IM ild U -in
Hilti’23
Floor0 117.01 × 52.23 42.22(25.13/17.09) 92.24 Point cloud & IMU
Floor1 106.11 106.98 50.14 43.12(27.43/15.69) 93.52 (10 Hz & 200 Hz, LiDAR)
Battery On-board
Floor2 154.65 × 53.24 41.78(26.12/15.66) 94.43 PC
Basement 118.21 × 48.23 39.65(24.53/15.12) 93.42 Fig. 12: Fully onboard UAV navigation algorithm flowchart.
Stairs 122.94 114.29 48.55 38.42(22.64/15.78) 95.53
Parking3xfloorsdown 142.43 × 51.89 43.62(26.99/16.63) 94.22
Largeroom 125.78 182.18 55.23 43.23(26.43/16.80) 93.28
Largeroom(dark) 131.31 × 51.46 44.21(29.12/15.09) 92.29
NTUVIRAL
eee 01 105.89 113.61 38.22 31.45(17.24/14.21) 78.03
eee 02 112.27 119.19 39.43 30.24(16.23/14.01) 79.22
eee 03 108.11 108.77 37.53 29.44(16.12/13.32) 77.43
nya 01 122.73 124.54 39.66 34.52(18.14/16.38) 79.44
nya 02 111.96 117.18 35.11 32.23(17.33/14.90) 80.52
nya 03 115.96 111.24 38.42 33.42(18.12/15.30) 78.95
sbs 01 112.77 115.67 39.23 31.92(14.68/17.24) 78.32
sbs 02 113.01 110.37 35.39 32.56(17.62/14.94) 72.43
sbs 03 119.91 120.73 37.41 33.62(18.02/15.60) 75.56
PrivateDataset
RetailStreet 85.32 70.23 31.22 19.44(10.42/9.02) 64.12
CBDBuilding01 79.22 65.32 29.14 18.22(10.32/7.90) 62.33
CBDBuilding02 × × × 21.53(11.50/10.03) 69.98
CBDBuilding03 × × × 21.89(11.98/9.91) 69.92
HKULandmark 75.43 68.77 28.33 17.42(10.12/7.30) 63.21
HKULectureCenter 70.42 × 31.45 18.12(10.99/7.13) 62.88
HKUCentennialGarden 74.33 70.12 33.46 19.22(10.80/8.42) 64.52
HKUCulturalCenter 102.34 × 35.62 21.43(11.42/10.01) 72.43
HKUMainBuilding 75.62 × 30.21 19.43(10.33/9.10) 65.31
HKUSTRedSculpture 84.22 90.13 32.43 20.14(11.12/9.02) 65.42
HITGraffitiWall 112.56 × 39.98 21.71(10.55/11.16) 68.99
BannerWall 74.13 × 30.22 19.32(10.01/9.31) 63.43
BrightScreenWall 73.23 × 28.43 18.22(9.92/8.30) 61.21
BlackScreenWall 71.42 × 27.66 17.99(9.10/8.89) 60.91
OfficeBuildingWall × × × 19.42(10.11/9.31) 62.33
Fig.13:(a)and(b)aretheenlargedpointmapsofthe“Woods”
NarrowCorridor × × × 18.44(8.32/10.12) 61.42
LongCorridor × × × 19.53(10.43/9.10) 62.55 and “Narrow Opening” experiments, respectively. The red
MiningTunnel × × × 29.43(15.42/14.01) 79.32 points in (a1), (a3), and (b4) represent the current scan. (a2)
SYSU01 112.66 88.95 32.23 23.65(12.51/11.14) 77.43
and (a4) represent the first-person view at the corresponding
SYSU02 110.12 × 32.12 22.63(11.82/10.81) 72.31
Average 108.36 108.45 41.43 30.03(17.13/12.90) 78.44 locations.(b1),(b2),and(b3)depictthethird-personview(see
×denotesthesystemtotallyfailed. more details on YouTube: youtu.be/aSAwVqR22mo).
Besideslocalization,FAST-LIVO2suppliesadenseregistered
solutions, including fully onboard autonomous UAV naviga-
point cloud to the planning module, the Bubble planner [55],
tion, airborne mapping, textured mesh generation, and 3D
which plans a smooth trajectory that is then tracked by an
Gaussian splatting reconstruction for 3D scene representation.
on-manifold Model Predictive Control (MPC) [56]. The MPC
A. Fully Onboard Autonomous UAV Navigation
calculates the desired angular rates and thrust, which are
Given the high precision and robust localization perfor- trackedbyrespectivelow-levelangularratecontrollersrunning
mance of FAST-LIVO2, along with its real-time capabilities, on the flight controller. Importantly, the MPC, Planner, and
we conduct closed-loop autonomous UAV flights. FAST-LIVO2alloperateontheonboardcomputerinrealtime.
1) System Configurations: The hardware and software 2) UAV Autonomous Navigation: We conduct 4 fully on-
setup are illustrated in Fig. 12. For hardware, we use a board autonomous UAV navigation experiments, “Basement”,
NUC (Intel i7-1360P CPU and 32 GB RAM) as the onboard “Woods”, “Narrow Opening”, and “SYSU Campus” (Ta-
computer. In terms of software, the localization component is ble S2 in the Supplementary Material [53]). “Basement” and
powered by FAST-LIVO2, which provides position feedback “Woods” experiments are fully autonomous flights incorpo-
at 10Hz. The localizationr result is fed to the flight controller rating all planning, MPC, and FAST-LIVO2 modules, while
to achieve 200Hz feedback on position, velocity, and attitude. “Narrow Opening” and “SYSU Campus” are manual flights

===== PAGE 18 =====
18
with only MPC and FAST-LIVO2 (without the planning com-
ponent). As can be seen, “Basement” and “Woods” showcase
the UAV’s successful autonomous navigation and obstacle
avoidance. In “Narrow Opening”, the UAV is commanded to
fly close proximity to a wall leading to few LiDAR points
measurements. Nevertheless, the raycasting module recalls a
greater number of visual map points, providing abundant con-
straints for localization, which allows for stable localization.
Moreover, “Basement” and “Narrow Opening” experience
LiDAR degeneration, observing only a single wall (see Fig. 1
(e1)and(e4),Fig.13(b1-b4)),alongwithsignificantexposure
variations (see Fig. 1 (e5-e6)). Despite these challenges, our
UAV system performed exceptionally well. “Woods” involves
the UAV moving at high speeds up to 3 m/s, demanding
rapid response from the entire UAV system (see Fig. 13 (a1-
a4)). “SYSU Campus”, a non-degenerated scene, primarily
demonstrates the onboard high-precision mapping capabilities
(see Fig. S14 in the Supplementary Material [53]). Finally, it
is worth mentioning that in all these four UAV flights, severe
lighting variation occurred. FAST-LIVO2 is able to estimate
exposuretimethatcloselyfollowstheground-truthvalues(see
Fig. S15 in the Supplementary Material [53]).
Regarding onboard computational time, the need to run
MPC (at 100 Hz) and Planning (at 10 Hz) on the onboard
computer consumes computational resources and memory,
limiting the computation resources available to FAST-LIVO2.
Despite of the concurrent execution of control and planning,
as illustrated in Fig. 14, the average onboard processing
time per LiDAR scan and image frame for FAST-LIVO2,
approximately 53.47 ms, is still well below the frame period
100 ms. The average processing times for planning and MPC
are 8.43 ms and 18.5 ms, respectively. The total average
processing time of 80.4 ms meets very well the real-time
requirements for onboard operations.
80
60
40
20
0
FAST-LIVO2 Planning MPC(10 times) Total time
)sm(
emiT
Fig.15:(a)and(b)arethemeshandtexturemappingof“CBD
Building01”,respectively.(c)isthetexturemappingof“Retail
Street”, with (c1) and (c2) showing local details.
whose real-time mapping results are illustrated in Fig. 1 (a-
c), with (a) and (c) corresponding to “HKisland01”, and
(b) depicting “HKairport01”. The results demonstrate the
effectiveness of FAST-LIVO2 in unstructured environments
such as forests and islands. The system successfully captures
many fine structures and sharp coloring effects, including
buildings, lane marks on roads, road curbs, tree crowns, and
rocks, all of which are clearly visible. The APE (RMSE) for
these sequences are 0.64 m and 0.27 m for FAST-LIVO2,
respectively, compared to 2.76 m and 0.52 m for R3LIVE.
The average processing times on the desktop PC (Section
IX-A), are approximately 25.2 ms and 21.8 ms, respectively,
compared to 110.5 ms and 100.2 ms for R3LIVE.
C. Supporting3DSceneApplications:MeshGeneration,Tex-
Onboard UAV Experiment Time Cost ture, and Gaussian Splatting
Leveragingthehigh-precisionsensorlocalizationanddense
3D colored point map obtained from FAST-LIVO2, we de-
velop software applications for rendering pipelines including
meshing and texturing, as well as emerging NeRF-like ren-
dering pipeline such as 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS). For
meshing,weemployVDBFusion[57]basedontheTruncated
Signed Distance Function (TSDF) in “CBD Building 01”,
shownin Fig.15 (a).The sharpedgeson thecolumns andthe
distinct structure of the roof are clearly visible, demonstrating
Fig. 14: The processing time of each module and in total in the high quality of the mesh. This level of detail is achieved
UAV autonomous navigation experiments across “Basement”, due to the high density of FAST-LIVO2’s point clouds and
“Woods”,“NarrowOpening”,and“SYSUCampus”.TheMPC the exceptional accuracy of structural reconstruction. After
executes at 100 Hz while planning and FAST-LIVO2 execute mesh construction, we use OpenMVS [58] to perform texture
at 10 Hz, so its computation time is counted for 10 times. mapping using the estimated camera poses in “CBD Building
01” and “Retail Street”, shown in Fig. 15 (b-c). In Fig. 15
B. Airborne Mapping
(c1-c2),thetextureimagesappliedonthetriangularfacetsare
Airbornemappingrepresentsacrucialtaskinsurveyingand seamless and accurately aligned, resulting in a highly clear
mapping applications. To evaluate the suitability of FAST- and precise texture mapping. This is attributed to pixel-level
LIVO2 for this application, we conduct an aerial mapping image alignment achieved by FAST-LIVO2.
experiment using the public dataset MARS-LVIG [52] whose The dense color point clouds from FAST-LIVO2 can also
hardware configuration is detailed in Section VIII-A. We directly serve as the input of 3DGS. We conduct tests on
evaluatethetwosequences“HKairport01”and“HKisland01”, the sequence “CBD Building 01” utilizing 300 frames out

===== PAGE 19 =====
19
Fig. 16: Comparison of ground-truth image, COLMAP+3DGS, and FAST-LIVO2+3DGS in terms of render details, computa-
tional time (time for generating point clouds and estimating poses + training time), and PSNR for a random frame in “CBD
Building 01” (see more details on YouTube: youtu.be/aSAwVqR22mo).
of a total of 1,180 images. The results are shown in Fig. 16. theslidingwindowoptimizationintoFAST-LIVO2tomitigate
ComparedtoCOLMAP[59],ourmethodsignificantlyreduces this long-term drift. Moreover, the accurate and dense colored
the time required to obtain dense point clouds and poses point maps could be used to extract semantic information for
from 9 hours to 21 s. However, the training time increases object-level semantic mapping.
from 10 min and 59 s to 15 min and 30 s. This increase is
attributed to the denser point clouds (downsampled to 5 cm),
whichintroducemoreparameterstooptimize.Nonetheless,the
REFERENCES
increased density and precision of our point clouds result in a
[1] R. Mur-Artal and J. D. Tardo´s, “Orb-slam2: An open-source slam
slightly higher Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) compared system for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras,” IEEE transactions
to the PSNR obtained from COLMAP inputs. onrobotics,vol.33,no.5,pp.1255–1262,2017.
[2] J. Engel, V. Koltun, and D. Cremers, “Direct sparse odometry,” IEEE
transactionsonpatternanalysisandmachineintelligence,vol.40,no.3,
XI. CONCLUSIONANDFUTUREWORK
pp.611–625,2017.
This paper proposed FAST-LIVO2, a direct LIVO frame- [3] J. Engel, T. Scho¨ps, and D. Cremers, “Lsd-slam: Large-scale direct
monocularslam,”inEuropeanconferenceoncomputervision. Springer,
workachievingfast,accurate,androbuststateestimationwhile
2014,pp.834–849.
reconstructing the map on the fly. FAST-LIVO2 can achieve [4] C.Forster,Z.Zhang,M.Gassner,M.Werlberger,andD.Scaramuzza,
highlocalizationaccuracywhilebeingrobusttosevereLiDAR “Svo:Semidirectvisualodometryformonocularandmulticamerasys-
tems,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 249–265,
and/or visual degeneration.
2016.
The gain in speed is attributed to the use of raw LiDAR,
[5] J. Zhang and S. Singh, “Loam: Lidar odometry and mapping in real-
inertial, and camera measurements within an efficient ESIKF time.”inRobotics:ScienceandSystems,vol.2,no.9,2014.
framework with sequential update. In the image update, an [6] J. Lin and F. Zhang, “Loam livox: A fast, robust, high-precision lidar
odometryandmappingpackageforlidarsofsmallfov,”in2020IEEE
inverse compositional formulation along with a sparse patch-
InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,
based image alignment is further adopted to boost the effi- 2020,pp.3126–3131.
ciency. The gain in accuracy is attributed to the use (and [7] T.ShanandB.Englot,“Lego-loam:Lightweightandground-optimized
lidar odometry and mapping on variable terrain,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ
even refine) of plane priors from LiDAR points to enhance
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
accuracy of image alignment. Besides, a single unified voxel IEEE,2018,pp.4758–4765.
mapisusedtomanagesimultaneouslythemappointsandthe [8] C.Zheng,Q.Zhu,W.Xu,X.Liu,Q.Guo,andF.Zhang,“Fast-livo:Fast
andtightly-coupledsparse-directlidar-inertial-visualodometry,”in2022
observedhigh-resolutionimagemeasurements.Thevoxelmap
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
structure, which supports geometry construction and update, (IROS). IEEE,2022,pp.4003–4009.
visual map point generation and update, and reference patch [9] T.Qin,P.Li,andS.Shen,“Vins-mono:Arobustandversatilemonocular
visual-inertialstateestimator,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,vol.34,
update, is developed and validated. The gain in robustness is
no.4,pp.1004–1020,2018.
duetoreal-timeestimationofexposuretime,whicheffectively [10] R.Mur-Artal,J.M.M.Montiel,andJ.D.Tardos,“Orb-slam:aversatile
handles environment illumination variation, and on-demand and accurate monocular slam system,” IEEE transactions on robotics,
vol.31,no.5,pp.1147–1163,2015.
voxel raycasting to cope with LiDARs’ close proximity blind
[11] M.IraniandP.Anandan,“Allaboutdirectmethods,”inProc.Workshop
zones. The efficiency and accuracy of FAST-LIVO2 were Vis.Algorithms,TheoryPract,1999,pp.267–277.
evaluated on extensive public datasets, while the robustness [12] C. Forster, M. Pizzoli, and D. Scaramuzza, “Svo: Fast semi-direct
and effectiveness of each system module were evaluated on monocularvisualodometry,”in2014IEEEinternationalconferenceon
roboticsandautomation(ICRA). IEEE,2014,pp.15–22.
privatedataset.TheapplicationsofFAST-LIVO2inreal-world
[13] W.Xu,Y.Cai,D.He,J.Lin,andF.Zhang,“Fast-lio2:Fastdirectlidar-
robotics applications, such as UAV navigation, 3D mapping, inertialodometry,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,pp.1–21,2022.
and model rendering, were also demonstrated. [14] C. Yuan, W. Xu, X. Liu, X. Hong, and F. Zhang, “Efficient and
probabilisticadaptivevoxelmappingforaccurateonlinelidarodometry,”
As an odometry, FAST-LIVO2 may have drifts over long
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 8518–8525,
distances. In the future, we could integrate loop closure and 2022.

===== PAGE 20 =====
20
[15] M. Meilland, A. I. Comport, and P. Rives, “Real-time dense visual [37] ——, “R 3 live++: A robust, real-time, radiance reconstruction pack-
tracking under large lighting variations,” in British Machine Vision age with a tightly-coupled lidar-inertial-visual state estimator,” arXiv
Conference. BritishMachineVisionAssociation,2011,pp.45–1. preprintarXiv:2209.03666,2022.
[16] T.Tykka¨la¨,C.Audras,andA.I.Comport,“Directiterativeclosestpoint [38] J. Engel, V. Usenko, and D. Cremers, “A photometrically cali-
forreal-timevisualodometry,”in2011IEEEInternationalConference brated benchmark for monocular visual odometry,” arXiv preprint
on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCV Workshops). IEEE, 2011, pp. arXiv:1607.02555,2016.
2050–2056. [39] W. Wang, J. Liu, C. Wang, B. Luo, and C. Zhang, “Dv-loam: Direct
[17] C. Kerl, J. Sturm, and D. Cremers, “Robust odometry estimation for visual lidar odometry and mapping,” Remote Sensing, vol. 13, no. 16,
rgb-dcameras,”in2013IEEEinternationalconferenceonroboticsand p.3340,2021.
automation. IEEE,2013,pp.3748–3754. [40] Z. Yuan, Q. Wang, K. Cheng, T. Hao, and X. Yang, “Sdv-loam:
[18] J.Engel,J.Sturm,andD.Cremers,“Semi-densevisualodometryfora Semi-directvisual-lidarodometryandmapping,”IEEETransactionson
monocularcamera,”inProceedingsoftheIEEEinternationalconference PatternAnalysisandMachineIntelligence,2023.
oncomputervision,2013,pp.1449–1456. [41] H. Zhang, L. Du, S. Bao, J. Yuan, and S. Ma, “Lvio-fusion:tightly-
[19] K.Chen,R.Nemiroff,andB.T.Lopez,“Directlidar-inertialodometry: coupledlidar-visual-inertialodometryandmappingindegenerateenvi-
Lightweightliowithcontinuous-timemotioncorrection,”in2023IEEE ronments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 4, pp.
InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE, 3783–3790,2024.
2023,pp.3983–3989. [42] W. Xu and F. Zhang, “Fast-lio: A fast, robust lidar-inertial odometry
[20] Z. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Shen, and Y. Zhou, “D-liom: Tightly-coupled package by tightly-coupled iterated kalman filter,” IEEE Robotics and
direct lidar-inertial odometry and mapping,” IEEE Transactions on AutomationLetters,pp.1–1,2021.
Multimedia,2022. [43] D.He,W.Xu,andF.Zhang,“Symbolicrepresentationandtoolkitde-
[21] J. Zhang and S. Singh, “Laser–visual–inertial odometry and mapping velopmentofiteratederror-stateextendedkalmanfiltersonmanifolds,”
with high robustness and low drift,” Journal of field robotics, vol. 35, IEEETransactionsonIndustrialElectronics,2023.
no.8,pp.1242–1264,2018. [44] D. Willner, C.-B. Chang, and K.-P. Dunn, “Kalman filter algorithms
[22] W.Shao,S.Vijayarangan,C.Li,andG.Kantor,“Stereovisualinertial for a multi-sensor system,” in 1976 IEEE conference on decision and
lidarsimultaneouslocalizationandmapping,”in2019IEEE/RSJInter- control including the 15th symposium on adaptive processes. IEEE,
nationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE, 1976,pp.570–574.
2019,pp.370–377. [45] J.MaandS.Sun,“Globallyoptimaldistributedandsequentialstatefu-
[23] J. Zhang, M. Kaess, and S. Singh, “A real-time method for depth sionfiltersformulti-sensorsystemswithcorrelatednoises,”Information
enhanced visual odometry,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 41, pp. 31–43, Fusion,p.101885,2023.
2017. [46] Y.Ren,Y.Cai,F.Zhu,S.Liang,andF.Zhang,“Rog-map:Anefficient
[24] J.Graeter,A.Wilczynski,andM.Lauer,“Limo:Lidar-monocularvisual robocentric occupancy grid map for large-scene and high-resolution
odometry,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent lidar-basedmotionplanning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2302.14819,2023.
robotsandsystems(IROS). IEEE,2018,pp.7872–7879. [47] R. M. Stereopsis, “Accurate, dense, and robust multiview stereopsis,”
[25] Y. Zhu, C. Zheng, C. Yuan, X. Huang, and X. Hong, “Camvox: A IEEETRANSACTIONSONPATTERNANALYSISANDMACHINEIN-
low-costandaccuratelidar-assistedvisualslamsystem,”in2021IEEE TELLIGENCE,vol.32,no.8,2010.
InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE, [48] S. Baker and I. Matthews, “Lucas-kanade 20 years on: A unifying
2021,pp.5049–5055. framework,”Internationaljournalofcomputervision,vol.56,pp.221–
[26] S.-S. Huang, Z.-Y. Ma, T.-J. Mu, H. Fu, and S.-M. Hu, “Lidar- 255,2004.
monocularvisualodometryusingpointandlinefeatures,”in2020IEEE [49] T.-M. Nguyen, S. Yuan, M. Cao, Y. Lyu, T. H. Nguyen, and L. Xie,
InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE, “Ntuviral:Avisual-inertial-ranging-lidardataset,fromanaerialvehicle
2020,pp.1091–1097. viewpoint,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 41,
[27] C. Campos, R. Elvira, J. J. G. Rodr´ıguez, J. M. Montiel, and J. D. no.3,pp.270–280,2022.
Tardo´s,“Orb-slam3:Anaccurateopen-sourcelibraryforvisual,visual– [50] M. Helmberger, K. Morin, B. Berner, N. Kumar, G. Cioffi, and
inertial, and multimap slam,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 37, D.Scaramuzza,“Thehiltislamchallengedataset,”IEEERoboticsand
no.6,pp.1874–1890,2021. AutomationLetters,vol.7,no.3,pp.7518–7525,2022.
[28] Y.-S.Shin,Y.S.Park,andA.Kim,“Dvl-slam:Sparsedepthenhanced [51] L.Zhang,M.Helmberger,L.F.T.Fu,D.Wisth,M.Camurri,D.Scara-
direct visual-lidar slam,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 115– muzza, and M. Fallon, “Hilti-oxford dataset: A millimeter-accurate
130,2020. benchmarkforsimultaneouslocalizationandmapping,”IEEERobotics
[29] X.Zuo,P.Geneva,W.Lee,Y.Liu,andG.Huang,“Lic-fusion:Lidar- andAutomationLetters,vol.8,no.1,pp.408–415,2022.
inertial-cameraodometry,”in2019IEEE/RSJInternationalConference [52] H.Li,Y.Zou,N.Chen,J.Lin,X.Liu,W.Xu,C.Zheng,R.Li,D.He,
onIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),2019,pp.5848–5854. F. Kong, et al., “Mars-lvig dataset: A multi-sensor aerial robots slam
[30] K.Sun,K.Mohta,B.Pfrommer,M.Watterson,S.Liu,Y.Mulgaonkar, dataset for lidar-visual-inertial-gnss fusion,” The International Journal
C.J.Taylor,andV.Kumar,“Robuststereovisualinertialodometryfor ofRoboticsResearch,p.02783649241227968,2024.
fastautonomousflight,”IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.3, [53] “Supplementary material: Fast-livo2: Fast, direct lidar-inertial-visual
no.2,pp.965–972,2018. odometry,”availableonline:https://github.com/hku-mars/FAST-LIVO2/
[31] X.Zuo,Y.Yang,P.Geneva,J.Lv,Y.Liu,G.Huang,andM.Pollefeys, blob/main/Supplementary/LIVO2 supplementary.pdf.
“Lic-fusion 2.0: Lidar-inertial-camera odometry with sliding-window [54] C.Klug,C.Arth,D.Schmalstieg,andT.Gloor,“Measurementuncer-
plane-featuretracking,”in2020IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceon taintyanalysisofarobotictotalstationsimulation,”inIECON2018-44th
IntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,2020,pp.5112–5119. AnnualConferenceoftheIEEEIndustrialElectronicsSociety. IEEE,
[32] D. Wisth, M. Camurri, S. Das, and M. Fallon, “Unified multi-modal 2018,pp.2576–2582.
landmark tracking for tightly coupled lidar-visual-inertial odometry,” [55] Y. Ren, F. Zhu, W. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Lin, F. Gao, and F. Zhang,
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1004–1011, “Bubble planner: Planning high-speed smooth quadrotor trajectories
2021. using receding corridors,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
[33] J. Lin, C. Zheng, W. Xu, and F. Zhang, “R2live: A robust, real-time, onIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,2022,pp.6332–6339.
lidar-inertial-visualtightly-coupledstateestimatorandmapping,”IEEE [56] G.Lu,W.Xu,andF.Zhang,“On-manifoldmodelpredictivecontrolfor
RoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.6,no.4,pp.7469–7476,2021. trajectorytrackingonroboticsystems,”IEEETransactionsonIndustrial
[34] C.F.W.BellB.M.,“Theiteratedkalmanfilterupdateasagauss-newton Electronics,vol.70,no.9,pp.9192–9202,2022.
method,”AutomaticControlIEEETransactions,vol.38,no.2,pp.294– [57] I. Vizzo, T. Guadagnino, J. Behley, and C. Stachniss, “Vdbfusion:
297,1993. Flexible and efficient tsdf integration of range sensor data,” Sensors,
[35] T. Shan, B. Englot, C. Ratti, and D. Rus, “Lvi-sam: Tightly-coupled vol. 22, no. 3, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/
lidar-visual-inertial odometry via smoothing and mapping,” in 2021 1424-8220/22/3/1296
IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA). [58] D. Cernea, “Openmvs: multi-view stereo reconstruction library. 2020,”
IEEE,2021,pp.5692–5698. URL:https://cdcseacave.github.io/openMVS,vol.5,no.6,p.7,2020.
[36] J.LinandF.Zhang,“R3live:Arobust,real-time,rgb-colored,lidar- [59] J. L. Scho¨nberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revisited,”
inertial-visual tightly-coupled state estimation and mapping package,” in2016IEEEConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition
in2022InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). (CVPR),2016,pp.4104–4113.
IEEE,2022,pp.10672–10678.

===== PAGE 21 =====
1
Supplementary Material for FAST-LIVO2: Fast, Direct LiDAR-Inertial-Visual Odometry
I.SYSTEMMODULEVALIDATION
In this section, we validate the key modules of our system, including the affine warping, normal refinement, reference patch
update, on-demanding raycasting query, exposure time estimation, and ESIKF sequential update utilizing the FAST-LIVO2
private dataset and MARS-LVIG dataset.
A. Evaluation of Affine Warping
In this experiment, we aim to comprehensively evaluate the various affine warping effects based on the constant depth
assumption (a common technique utilized in semi-dense methods), the plane prior from point clouds, and the refined plane
normal of our proposed system (denoted as “Constant depth”, “Plane prior”, and “Plane normal refined“, respectively). To
achieve this, we compare the mapping results and drift metrics of the three methods on “CBD Building 02” and “Office
Building Wall”. As depicted in Fig. S2, “Plane normal refined” delivers the most clear and accurate mapping results and the
next best is “Plane prior”. Notably, “Plane normal refined” renders text and patterns on the ground and walls, as well as lane
markings, with remarkable clarity. Moreover, the drift associated with “Plane prior” and “Plane normal refined” remains below
0.01m, whereas “Constant depth” does not return to the starting position, experiencing a drift of 0.22m. Such results confirm
the enhanced performance of affine warping based on the plane prior and enhancements by the plane normal refinement.
Besides,wecomparewarpedprojectioneffectsbasedon“Constantdepth”and“Planeprior”onthesequence“CBDBuilding
02”and“OfficeBuildingWall”.Werandomlyselectseveralimageframesfromthesetwosequencesforthequalitativeanalysis.
For each frame, we project the reference patches attached to the visual map points visible in the frame onto a blank image of
the current frame. This process yields a novel RGB image. If the affine warping and pose estimation are both performed well,
areas with patch projections will produce a seamless and minimally distorted appearance, closely resembling the raw RGB
image. The comparison of warped patches is presented in Fig. S1. The results indicate that the pose accuracy and warped
performance under “Plane prior” significantly outperform those under “Constant depth” .
Fig. S1: (a) and (c) depict the warped patches derived from the constant depth assumption, while (b) and (d) represent those
based on the plane prior.
B. Evaluation of Reference Patch Update and Normal Convergence
In this experiment, we validate the effects of the reference patch update strategy and normal convergence on “HIT Graffiti
Wall” and “HKU Centennial Garden”. As shown in Fig. S3, (a) and (b) are the reconstructed point clouds of these two
sequences. On the right, for each region from A to H, we respectively present five patch observations captured at different
poses, each with a patch size of 40×40 pixels for visualization. These patches are observed in camera frames located at
corresponding numbers on the left. As can be seen, our reference path update strategy tends to choose a high-resolution
reference patch that faces the plane along its normal. It is also noticed that, despite of visual map points and patches generated
at non-planar locations (e.g., tree leaves, trunk, and a lamp stand), the overall mapping quality is still high.
We also evaluate the convergence of our proposed normal estimation across patches in regions A to H. Each patch is in the
size of 11×11 pixels. The initial normal vector is estimated from the LiDAR points. The convergence curves, which represent
the angle change between the initial and optimized normal vectors at each iteration number, are shown in Fig. S3. Regions
A, C, D, and E are structured areas, whereas regions B, F, G, and H are unstructured ones. It can be observed that normal
vectors for structured areas converge faster (within 6 iterations) with small normal refinement (2 to 4 degrees) because the
initial normal provided by point clouds is relatively accurate. In unstructured areas, such as shrubs and tree leaves (i.e., B and
F), the normal refinement is significant (up to 9 degrees) and requires 9 iterations to converge. Overall, normal refinement
across these 8 regions demonstrates good convergence properties.

===== PAGE 22 =====
2
Fig. S2: (a) and (b) are FAST-LIVO2 default mapping results in “CBD Building 02” and “Office Building Wall”, respectively.
(a1, b1), (a2, b2), (a3, b3) are enlarged views of the point clouds using “Plane normal refined”, “Plane prior”, and “Constant
depth”, respectively.
Iteration Number
)seergeD(
egnahC
elgnA
(c) Normal Convergence Across Different Visual Map Points (A to H)
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Fig. S3: The illustration of reference patch update. (a) and (b) are the reconstructed point clouds of sequences “HIT Graffiti
Wall” and “HKU Centennial Garden”, respectively. Regions A to H encompass both structured and unstructured areas in the
scene. On the right, the 40×40 image patches illustrate various observations for the same region, with numbers indicating
the corresponding camera frame on the left. The reference patch for each region is highlighted by a red box. (c) shows the
convergence of patch normal across regions A to H.

===== PAGE 23 =====
3
(a) (b)
Weakly textured wall
1.9m
`
Fig. S4: The illustration of on-demand raycasting and voxel query. (a) displays a top-down view of the reconstructed point
cloudfor“NarrowCorridor”,withacorridorwidthof1.9m.In(a),thebluelineindicatesthetrajectoryandtheyellowarrows
represent the direction of movement. The LiDAR camera sensor suite is turned to face a wall on the left side at the location
contained in the dashed box. (b) shows the camera image during the turn, having dim lighting conditions and very few LiDAR
points. In (b), blue dots represent points acquired from raycasting, yellow dots indicate points from voxel query, and red dots
are points in the LiDAR scan.
Ground Truth Retail Street Retail SHtreKetU Centennial Garden
Estimated
HKU Cultural Center HKU Main Building
)sm(
emiT
erusopxE
Fig. S5: Comparison of estimated exposure time versus ground truth exposure time in “Retail Street”, “HKU Centennial
Garden”, “HKU Cultural Center”, and “HKU Main Building”.
C. Evaluation of On-demand Raycasting
In this experiment, we assess the performance of the on-demand raycasting module under extreme conditions where the
currentandrecentLiDARscanshavefeworevennopointsduetoLiDARs’closeproximityblindzone1.Weusethesequence
“Narrow Corridor” for an in-depth analysis illustrated in Fig. S4. In this sequence, we traverse an extremely narrow tunnel,
approximately 1.9m in width, and turn to face the weakly textured wall on one side. Due to the limited points in the LiDAR
scans when facing the wall, we can only acquire few visual map points through voxel query (yellow dots in Fig. S4 (b)). In
this case, raycasting offers sufficient visual constraints to mitigate degeneration (blue dots in Fig. S4 (b)). The visualization
results demonstrate that the on-demand raycasting module works well under challenging conditions with few points in LiDAR
scans.
D. Evaluation of Exposure Time Estimation
In this experiment, we validate the exposure time estimation module in two parts: 1) For the sequence with fixed exposure
and gain, we multiply each pixel of the received raw image by an exposure factor that changes sinusoidally over time. We
verify the effectiveness of our estimation by comparing the estimated exposure times against the sinusoidal function applied.
2) For sequences with auto-exposure and either fixed or auto-gain settings, we evaluate the accuracy of our estimated exposure
times by comparing them with the ground truth values retrieved from the camera’s API.
In part one, we test on the sequence “Retail Street”, applying an exposure factor to images with fixed exposure and gain. As
showninFig.S5,theestimatedrelativeinverseexposuretimematchesthetruevaluesverywell,evidencingtheconvergenceof
our exposure estimation in synthetic conditions. In part two, we use the sequences “HKU Centennial Garden”, “HKU Cultural
Garden” and “HKU Main Building”, which have significant exposure time changes, for testing. We scale the estimated relative
exposure times by the first frame to recover the actual exposure time (ms) of each frame. As shown in Fig. S5, the estimated
exposuretimefollowscloselytheground-truthvalues,whichvalidatestheeffectivenessofourexposuretimeestimationmodule.
The occasional mismatches are possibly due to the unmodeled response function and vignetting factor [38].
1https://www.livoxtech.com/avia/specs

===== PAGE 24 =====
4
E. Evaluation of ESIKF Sequential Update
In this experiment, we evaluate different ESIKF update strategies for LiDAR and camera states. We compare asynchronous
versussynchronousupdates,aswellasstandardversussequentialupdates.Specifically,weassessthreestrategies:“asynchronous
(standard update)”, where the camera and LiDAR states are updated at their respective sampling times without scan
recombination; “synchronous (standard update)”, where LiDAR scans are recombined to sync with camera images and the
state is updated with both LiDAR and camera measurements within a standard ESIKF; and “synchronous (sequential update)”,
where the LiDAR and camera are synced but the state is first updated by LiDAR measurements and then updated by camera
measurements.Thesestrategiesareevaluatedintermsofaccuracy,robustness,andefficiencyusingthe“AMvalley03”sequence
of the MARS-LVIG dataset. We select this sequence for several key reasons:
(1) This sequence includes slopes that lead to both LiDAR and visual degenerations, making it a challenging test case.
(2) This sequence represents an extremely large-scale scenario (approximately 901m×500m×130m) with long-term and
high-speed data collection (covering 600s at a speed of 12m/s), where pose deviations are prone to occur (due to the
long-termandhigh-speedconditions),andevenslightdriftscancausesignificantblurringinthecoloredpointclouds(due
to the large scale), leading to more pronounced comparative results.
(3) This sequence provides the RTK ground truth data, allowing for more accurate quantitative comparisons.
Wecomparethequalitativemappingresults,quantitativeAPE,andtheaverageprocessingtimeofthethreeupdatestrategies.
Theexperimentalconfigurationisasfollows:LiDARupdatesinvolveupto5iterations,visualupdatesuseathree-levelpyramid
withupto5iterationsperlevelandnomorethan3iterationsperlevelwhenthecameraandLiDARareupdatedsimultaneously
in a standard ESIKF, and the scale normalization factor (from visual photometric error to LiDAR point-to-plane distance) for
the “synchronous (standard update)” is set to 0.0032, which has been meticulously tuned for optimal performance.
Fig.S6,(a-c)presentthereconstructedcoloredpointcloudsforthissequence.Itisevidentthatthe“synchronous(sequential
update)” strategy produces accurate mapping results, particularly in the areas highlighted by the blue and orange boxes, where
the mountain roads are reconstructed without any layering. In contrast, the other two strategies exhibit misalignments in
these areas, although the “synchronous (standard update)” performs slightly better than the “asynchronous (standard update)”.
The superior performance of the “synchronous (sequential update)” strategy is mainly attributed to its robustness in handling
significant LiDAR and visual degenerations, as seen in the white box (c3). This area features a large, textureless slope, and the
UAV passes over it at a high speed, heavily relying on a strong prior. The other two methods, which rely solely on the IMU
prior, struggle to compute a relatively accurate image gradient descent direction, leading to significant linearization errors.
The APE (RMSE) metrics for the “AMvalley03” sequence are 3.12m, 2.45m, and 0.68m for the “asynchronous (standard
update)”, “synchronous (standard update)”, and “synchronous (sequential update)”, respectively. The average processing times
on a desktop PC (Section IX-A) are approximately 27.6ms, 49.9ms, and 23.1ms. Our proposed “synchronous (sequential
update)”achievesthehighestefficiencyandaccuracy,whilethe“asynchronous(standardupdate)”hasthelowestaccuracy.The
“synchronous (standard update)” is the most time-consuming, primarily because it requires fusing all LiDAR measurements at
each level of the image pyramid.
Overall, our proposed “synchronous (sequential update)” offers superior accuracy and efficiency, while the “asynchronous
(standard update)” has the lowest accuracy, and the “synchronous (standard update)” is the most time-consuming.
Fig. S6: (a), (b), and (c) are the mapping results in “AMvalley03” for the “asynchronous (standard update)”, “synchronous
(standard update)”, and “synchronous (sequential update)” strategies, respectively. (a1, b1, c1) and (a2, b2, c2) are enlarged
views of the point clouds for different update strategies. The blue line represents the UAV’s flight path, and the red points in
(c3) indicate the LiDAR scan at that moment.

===== PAGE 25 =====
5
II.ADDITIONALINFORMATION
TABLE S1: Overview of FAST-LIVO2 Private Dataset
Duration Sensor Return Exposure/ Exposure CloseSurface Scene
Sequence
(minute:second) Degeneration Origin1 GainMode Time2 Distance3 Characteristics
RetailStreet 2min:15sec — ✓ Fixed/Fixed Outdoor
CBDBuilding01 1min:58sec — ✓ Fixed/Auto Outdoor
CBDBuilding02 3min:54sec LiDAR ✓ Auto/Fixed ✓ Outdoor
CBDBuilding03 5min:01sec Camera,LiDAR ✓ Auto/Fixed ✓ Outdoor,Textureless
HKULandmark 1min:31sec — ✓ Auto/Fixed ✓ Outdoor
HKULectureCenter 1min:17sec LiDAR ✓ Auto/Fixed ✓ Indoor
HKUCentennialGarden 1min:32sec LiDAR ✓ Auto/Fixed ✓ Outdoor
HKUCulturalCenter 4min:01sec LiDAR ✓ Auto/Fixed ✓ Outdoor
HKUMainBuilding 1min:36sec Camera,LiDAR ✓ Auto/Auto ✓ Out(In)door4,Textureless
HKUSTRedSculpture 2min:10sec — ✓ Fixed/Auto Outdoor,Cluttered
HITGraffitiWall 8min:57sec LiDAR ✓ Fixed/Auto Outdoor
BannerWall 1min:40sec LiDAR ✓ Fixed/Auto Indoor,Dim
BrightScreenWall 1min:18sec LiDAR ✓ Fixed/Auto Indoor
BlackScreenWall 0min:56sec Camera,LiDAR ✓ Fixed/Auto Indoor,Textureless
OfficeBuildingWall 1min:9sec LiDAR ✓ Fixed/Auto ✓ Outdoor
NarrowCorridor 1min:1sec Camera,LiDAR ✓ Fixed/Auto ✓ Indoor,Dim,Textureless
LongCorridor 1min:35sec LiDAR ✓ Fixed/Auto ✓ Indoor,Dim
MiningTunnel 15min:49sec Camera,LiDAR ✓ Fixed/Auto Indoor,Dim,Textureless
SYSU01 4min:40sec — ✓ Auto/Auto Outdoor,Light5
SYSU02 4min:30sec Camera,LiDAR ✓ Auto/Auto Out(In)door,Light
Total 66min:50sec Camera,LiDAR ✓ Auto(Fixed)/Auto(Fixed) ✓ ✓ Out(In)door,Light,
Dim,Textureless
1Sequencesarecollectedbytravelinginaloop,startingandendingatthesameposition.
2Sequenceswithgroundtruthcameraexposuretimereadfromcamera’sAPI.
3SequencesexistwhereLiDARcapturesno/limitedpointcloudsduetocloseproximityblindzones.
4Sequencesincludetheprocessofmovingfromindoortooutdoorenvironments.
5Sequencescharacterizedbysignificantlightingvariations.
TABLE S2: Overview of UAV Autonomous Navigation Experiments
FlightDuration Flight Sensor Return Exposure/ Exposure CloseProximity Scene
Experiment
(minute:second) Mode6 Degeneration origin GainMode Time toObstacles Characteristics
Basement 5min Autonomous Camera,LiDAR ✓ Auto/Auto ✓ Out(In)door,Light
NarrowOpening 2min:32sec Manual Camera,LiDAR ✓ Auto/Auto ✓ ✓ Out(In)door,Light
SYSUCampus 3min:6sec Manual — ✓ Auto/Auto Outdoor,Light
Woods 2min:49sec Autonomous Camera ✓ Auto/Fixed ✓ Outdoor,Cluttered
6Inautonomousmode,FAST-LIVO2,planning,andMPCmodulesareallrunning.Inmanualmode,FAST-LIVO2andMPCarerunningwhileplanning
isdisabled.
TABLE S3: Average processing time per frame for FAST-LIO2 across different datasets
Hilti’22&Hilti’23 ProcessingTime(ms) NTUVIRAL ProcessingTime(ms) PrivateDataset ProcessingTime(ms)
ConstructionGround 24.32 eee 01 17.63 RetailStreet 10.23
ConstructionMultilevel 23.21 eee 02 17.33 CBDBuilding01 10.40
ConstructionStairs × eee 03 15.32 CBDBuilding02 ×
LongCorridor 28.43 nya 01 19.99 CBDBuilding03 ×
Cupola × nya 02 18.62 HKULandmark 11.62
LowerGallery 24.49 nya 03 19.32 HKULectureCenter ×
AttictoUpperGallery × nya 04 15.71 HKUCentennialGarden ×
OutsideBuilding 18.67 sbs 02 16.10 HKUCulturalCenter ×
Floor0 27.34 sbs 03 17.71 HKUMainBuilding ×
Floor1 27.12 HKUSTRedSculpture 10.98
Floor2 25.22 HITGraffitiWall ×
Basement 22.31 BannerWall ×
Stairs 20.91 BrightScreenWall ×
Parking3xfloorsdown × BlackScreenWall ×
Largeroom 29.26 OfficeBuildingWall ×
Largeroom(dark) 28.20 NarrowCorridor ×
LongCorridor ×
MiningTunnel ×
SYSU01 11.21
SYSU02 ×
OverallAverage 19.68
7×denotesthesystemtotallyfailed.

===== PAGE 26 =====
6
Fig. S7: Challenging environments captured in the FAST-LIVO2 private dataset.
Fig. S8: The real-time mapping results of FAST-LIVO2 in the Hilti’22 dataset. (a) “Attic to Upper Gallery”, (b) “Cupola”, (c)
“Lower Gallery”, and (d) “Construction Stairs”. The point clouds in (a-c) are colored by intensity, while (d) is colored using
grayscale images.

===== PAGE 27 =====
7
Fig. S9: The real-time mapping results generated online in rich texture and structured scenes. The point clouds from left to
right correspond to “HKU Landmark”, “SYSU 01” and ”CBD Building 01”, respectively, showing the comparison of colored
point cloud accuracy among FAST-LIVO2, FAST-LIVO, R3LIVE, and FAST-LIO2.
Fig. S10: The real-time mapping results of FAST-LIVO2 in “HKU Main Building”, containing aggressive motions, indoor-to-
outdoor, outdoor-to-indoor, and a weakly textured wall.

===== PAGE 28 =====
8
Fig. S11: The real-time mapping results of FAST-LIVO2 in “SYSU 02”. (a) birdview of the colored point map, (b) drastic
lighting changes from indoor to outdoor facing the sun, (c) closeup view of details.
Fig.S12:Thereal-timemappingresultsofFAST-LIVO2in“LongCorridor”.(a)birdviewofthecoloredpointmap,(b)closeup
view of details, (c) LiDAR facing a single wall causing LiDAR degeneration.

===== PAGE 29 =====
9
Fig. S13: The real-time mapping results of FAST-LIVO2 in rich texture and structured scenes. (a) “HKUST Red Sculpture”,
(b) “CBD Building 01”.
Fig.S14:(a)istheenlargedpointcloudimageofthe“SYSUCampus”experiment.(a1),(a2),and(a3)representthethird-person
view at the corresponding locations.

===== PAGE 30 =====
10
Ground truth Basement Narrow Opening
Estimated
SYSU Campus Woods
)sm(
emiT
erusopxE
Fig. S15: Comparison of estimated exposure time versus the ground truth exposure time in “Basement”, “Narrow Opening”,
“SYSU Campus”, and “Woods”.
